Title: World Translation: Minimizing Sim-to-Real Gap with Backward Dynamics Extraction and Unpaired Domain Translation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18154v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 02:10:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# World Translation: Minimizing Sim-to-Real Gap with Backward Dynamics Extraction and Unpaired Domain Translation 

Xinchen Yao 1, Leixing Chang 1, and Hua Chen 2

Abstract — The gap between simulation and reality remains a fundamental challenge in deploying simulation-trained robotic policies in the real world. Real-to-sim methods narrow this gap from the real side, learning transition dynamics from real data to build a more realistic digital world. Learned dynamics models are their dominant instance. Such methods, however, face a partial observability problem: the same observation may branch to different transitions due to unobservable factors. Existing methods assume these factors can be recovered from observation history. However, this may fail whenever observa-tion history is uninformative, such as a sudden contact event with no prior warning. To address this limitation, we propose 

World Translation , which exploits a complementary strength of simulators and learned dynamics. Simulators are deterministic but physically imperfect, while learned models are accurate but underdetermined under partial observability. Rather than predicting transitions forward from history, we extract the unobservable dynamics information backward from an ob-served transition, then translate this feature across simulation and reality as an unpaired domain-translation problem that preserves dynamics content while transferring domain style. Experiments across humanoid, quadruped, and manipulator platforms show that our method achieves more accurate dy-namics modeling than baselines, with the largest gains when unobservable factors cannot be recovered from observation history. Real-robot deployment on Go2 quadruped confirms improved policy transfer. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Sim-to-real transfer is fundamental to robot learning, yet the gap between simulation and reality remains a chal-lenge [1]–[3]. The two dominant mitigation strategies, do-main randomization (DR) [4]–[6] and system identification (SysID) [7], [8], each carries a structural cost. DR buys robustness by sacrificing policy optimality [9], [10], while SysID calibrates a predefined model and therefore cannot account for unmodeled dynamics. Learned dynamics mod-els [11]–[14], including residual variants [15]–[17], take a more promising route, fitting transition dynamics directly from real data and can in principle capture the very phenom-ena the other two miss. That promise, however, is undercut by partial observability. The same observation-action pair can branch to different transitions because of unobserved factors. Existing models assume these are recoverable from observation history, which fails whenever the history is uninformative, such as a sudden contact in proprioceptive locomotion, forcing the prediction to average over the pos-sible transition modes. Our key observation is that simulators and learned models fail in opposite ways. A simulator keeps a complete inter-   

> 1Zhejiang University
> 2LimX Dynamics
> Fig. 1. World Translation bridges the sim-to-real gap by extracting dynamics features from observed transitions and translating them across domains. Black arrows are used during training; the blue arrow illustrates the inference pipeline, where simulation dynamics features are translated and reconstructed to predict real-world transitions.

nal state and predicts deterministically but with physically inaccurate transitions, whereas a learned model predicts accurately from data but stays underdetermined under partial observability. The signal the learned model lacks is not gone. It lives in the transition outcome, which a simulator can observe at will. This motivates backward dynamics extrac-tion . Rather than predicting a transition forward from history, we encode the unobservable dynamics information backward from an already-observed transition, directly capturing what causes transition uncertainty. Because the same hidden factor leaves different signatures across domains, features extracted in one cannot be used directly in the other. We address this with unpaired domain translation , which maps these features between simulation and reality, using cycle consistency to preserve dynamics content while transferring domain style. We call the resulting framework World Translation .Our contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) Backward dynamics extraction: unobservable dynamics information is recoverable from transition outcomes even when observation history is insufficient to recover it, making backward extraction more broadly reliable than history-based methods. 2) Unpaired domain translation over dynam-ics features: cycle consistency over extracted dynamics features enables domain transfer without requiring paired sim-real transitions. 3) Empirical validation on humanoid, quadruped, and manipulator platforms, with real-robot Go2 deployment showing improved policy performance. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Sim-to-Real and Learned Dynamics 

Sim-to-real transfer is commonly addressed through do-main randomization [4]–[6], [18] and system identifica-tion [7], [8], with recent hybrids [19], [20]. As noted in Sec-tion I, both trade away either policy optimality or the ability arXiv:2607.18154v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jul 2026 to model phenomena outside a predefined structure. Learned dynamics models instead build a realistic physics environ-ment directly from real transition data. PILCO [21] showed sample efficiency via Gaussian processes and PETS [22] extended this to neural networks. The Dreamer family [11]– [13] learns latent dynamics from high-dimensional observa-tions. DayDreamer [23] adapts online on real robots. TD-MPC2 [14] couples world models with model predictive con-trol. Despite their differences, most assume the unobservable factors are recoverable from observation history. 

B. Residual Dynamics and Action 

Residual methods aim to produce more realistic next observations by augmenting the simulator with learned corrections: residual dynamics methods correct outputs di-rectly [15]–[17], [24], while residual action methods mod-ify inputs so the simulator naturally produces better out-comes [25]–[27]. Both treat the simulator as a fixed prior to be corrected, rather than a source of dynamics information, and share this history-recoverability assumption. 

C. Unpaired Domain Translation 

CycleGAN [28] introduced cycle-consistent adversarial training for unpaired image-to-image translation. It has been applied to visual sim-to-real transfer [29], [30], addressing only the visual gap. We apply unpaired translation to learned dynamics features rather than images, enabling simulation to supply dynamics information that forward-prediction objec-tives may not recover from observation history. III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

A. System Dynamics and Hidden Variables 

We now formalize the problem by introducing two types of unobservable factors: time-varying hidden variables ht

and time-invariant domain characteristics c. Consider arobotic system with inaccessible full state st ∈ S , accessible observation ot ∈ O , and accessible action at ∈ A . The dynamics evolution is deterministic in state space, and we have st+1 = g(st, at). However, due to the information gap between st and ot, identical observation-action pairs can produce different outcomes, and the mapping (ot, at) 7 →

ot+1 is not deterministic. To model the unobservable factors and restore determinism, we introduce hidden variables ht ∈H, capturing the unobservable component of the full state; ht

may vary unpredictably. By conditioning on ht, the dynamics become deterministic: 

ot+1 = f (ot, at, ht). (1) We make no assumptions about p(ht+1 |ht, ot, at), requiring only that the effect of ht be identifiable from the observed transition (ot, at) → ot+1 .

B. Backward Dynamics Extraction 

As a learned dynamics model, our goal is to predict ot+1 .As formulated in (1), this requires knowledge of hidden variables ht. While ht cannot be directly observed, its effect on dynamics is detectable through state transitions.         

> Domain
> invariant variant
> Time
> invariant variant
> Absorbed in f
> (e.g., gravity)
> c: Domain Char.
> (e.g., friction, motor)
> ht: Hidden Variables
> (e.g., collision, contact) Unmodeled factors
> (add to simulation)
> Conventional methods ■World Translation
> Fig. 2. Taxonomy of unobservable factors. Conventional dynamics models implicitly learn time-invariant domain characteristics ( c) but cannot explic-itly capture time-variant hidden variables ( ht) when history is insufficient to recover them. World Translation captures htthrough backward extraction, enabling generalization across cases where history-based inference fails. Factors that are both domain-variant and time-variant (e.g., a payload present in reality but absent in simulation) represent unmodeled phenomena that World Translation cannot recover from the source system.

We introduce a dynamics feature zt = ω(ht) to represent this information in latent space. 

(ot, at, ot+1 ) encode 

−−−−→ zt = ω(ht), (2) 

(ot, at, zt) decode 

−−−−→ ot+1 . (3) We call this backward extraction because it uses future information ot+1 to infer zt at time t.However, this extraction alone does not enable dynamics prediction. zt requires observing the outcome ot+1 , which is precisely what we wish to predict. To make zt useful, we need an alternative source, such as a simulator where transitions can be observed, from which we extract dynamics features and translate them to the target system. 

C. Unpaired Domain Translation 

The backward extraction in Section III-B assumes a single domain where zt = ω(ht). However, when applying this framework across domains, for example, simulation and real-ity, the same hidden variable ht produces different observed transitions in each domain. Therefore, the dynamics feature extracted from transitions is not solely a function of ht,but also depends on which domain generated the transition. We introduce domain characteristics c to explicitly capture these systematic differences. With ht and c, the dynamics can be formulated as ot+1 = f (ot, at, ht, c). c is an implicitly learned representation capturing domain-specific effects, including unmodeled phenomena. Figure 2 illustrates how ht and c relate to other unobservable factors. In a multi-domain setting, the dynamics feature zt is deter-mined by both hidden variables and domain characteristics: 

(ot, at, ot+1 ) encode 

−−−−→ zt = ω(ht, c), (4) 

(ot, at, zt) decode 

−−−−→ ot+1 . (5) For the same ht, zAt = ω(ht, cA) and zBt = ω(ht, cB ). We seek GA→B such that: 

GA→B (ω(ht, cA)) ≈ ω(ht, cB ). (6) This is an unpaired translation problem: transitions collected with matching (ot, at) across domains cannot guarantee identical underlying ht, as physical interactions cannot be precisely reproduced. 

D. Combined Objective 

World Translation learns a feature zt and a cross-domain mapping GA→B , such that observing a transition in domain 

A predicts the corresponding transition in domain B:

oAt+1 

> encode

−−−−→

> ot,at

zAtGA→B

−−−−−→ zBt

> decode

−−−−→

> ot,at

oBt+1 . (7) IV. M ETHOD 

We instantiate the World Translation framework defined in Section III using a VAE with auxiliary regularization for backward dynamics extraction and a CycleGAN [28] for unpaired domain translation. 

A. Backward Dynamics Extraction 

We implement the dynamics encoder-decoder using a vari-ational autoencoder. We first describe the core architecture, then analyze two challenges that arise during training and introduce auxiliary objectives to address them. The encoder Eϕ maps a transition tuple to a latent dis-tribution (μ, log σ2) = Eϕ(ot, at, ot+1 ), where the latent code is sampled as zt ∼ N (μ, diag (σ2)) . The decoder Dθ

reconstructs the next observation: ˆot+1 = Dθ (ot, at, zt).Ideally, the encoder encodes both ht and c into zt, but two challenges prevent this from happening naturally. 

Challenge 1: Direct encoding of ot+1 . The encoder might bypass learning meaningful dynamics by directly encod-ing ot+1 into zt. We introduce a blind decoder Dψ that attempts to predict the next observation from zt alone: 

˜ot+1 = Dψ (zt). If the blind decoder can accurately predict 

ot+1 from zt without access to (ot, at), then zt contains direct observation information rather than abstract dynamics features. The encoder minimizes reconstruction error while simultaneously maximizing the blind decoder’s prediction error. The blind decoder tries to minimize its own error, creating an adversarial objective: 

Lblind = λb exp 



− ∥ot+1 − ˜ot+1 ∥2

σ2

> b



(8) The exponential form provides bounded gradients and satu-rates smoothly when the blind decoder error is already high, avoiding unnecessary optimization pressure. The temperature 

σb controls sensitivity. The blind decoder is trained sepa-rately with detached gradients from the encoder. 

Challenge 2: Information leakage in (ot, at). The data-collecting policy reacts to both ht and c, so (ot, at) carries partial information about both. For ht, this is benign: the encoder only needs to extract the remaining information into zt, and during translation (ot, at) stays unchanged, so complete ht semantics are preserved. For c, however, since the decoder can infer domain information from (ot, at)

alone, the encoder has no incentive to encode c into zt, but translation requires c to be encoded in zt. We introduce two auxiliary components. First, we add a domain classifier Cξ

that predicts which domain a latent code originates from: 

ˆd = Cξ (zt). By requiring the classifier to succeed, we force 

zt to encode domain-specific information: 

Lcls = λc · BCE (Cξ (zt), d ), (9) where d ∈ { 0, 1} is the domain label and BCE denotes binary cross-entropy. Even with domain information in zt,the decoder might still infer c from (ot, at) and ignore the domain information encoded in zt. We replace the basic MLP decoder with Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM) [31], where zt conditions each layer: 

Dθ (ot, at, zt) = FiLM (ot, at; zt)= γ(zt) ⊙ f (ot, at) + β(zt), (10) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. FiLM has an inductive bias toward using zt as the dominant conditioning signal, discouraging the decoder from bypassing it even when 

(ot, at) provides partial domain cues. While these auxiliary components do not theoretically guarantee the decoder uses domain information from zt, we find empirically that they are effective, as reported in Section V-B.2. The full training objective combines all components: 

LVAE = ∥ot+1 − ˆot+1 ∥2

| {z }

> reconstruction

+ β · KL (qϕ(zt)∥p(zt)) 

| {z }

> regularization

+ λb exp 



− ∥ot+1 − ˜ot+1 ∥2

σ2

> b

| {z }

> blind penalty

+ λc · BCE (Cξ (zt), d )

| {z }

> domain classification

(11) 

B. Unpaired Domain Translation 

Between simulation domain S and real-world domain R,we implement domain translation using CycleGAN [28] with generators GS→R and GR→S (residual MLPs) and discriminators DS and DR. The generators are trained with standard adversarial loss, cycle consistency loss (ensuring 

zS ≈ GR→S (GS→R(zS )) ), and optional identity loss. This preserves hidden variable semantics in zt while transforming domain characteristics. 

C. Training and Deployment Pipeline 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the training procedure. We train the VAE and CycleGAN jointly, with encoder-decoder shared across both domains. This shared representation ensures that dynamics features from different domains occupy a common latent space, making translation meaningful. At deployment, we apply the trained models during sim-ulation. Given a simulator transition (ot, at, oS

> t+1

), we en-code, translate, and decode to obtain the aligned observation 

oS→Rt+1 , then overwrite the simulator state rather than merely transforming observations. This ensures the policy trains on trajectories that evolve according to translated dynamics. Domain randomization is disabled during World Translation training to ensure deterministic simulation dynamics. Algorithm 1: World Translation Training 

Initialize encoder Eϕ, decoder Dθ , blind decoder Dψ ,classifier Cξ . Initialize generators GS→R, G R→S and discriminators DS , D R

while not converged do 

// Backward Dynamics Extraction Sample transitions {(ot, at, ot+1 )} ∼ D S ∪ D R

Encode: zt ∼ qϕ(zt | ot, at, ot+1 )

Decode: ˆot+1 = Dθ (ot, at, zt)

Blind predict: ˜ot+1 = Dψ (zt)

Classify: ˆd = Cξ (zt)

Update ϕ, θ, ξ : minimize LVAE 

Update ψ: minimize ∥ot+1 − ˜ot+1 ∥2 with zt detached 

// Unpaired Domain Translation Sample domain-separated batches from DS and DR

Encode: zS ∼ qϕ(z | D S ), zR ∼ qϕ(z | D R)

Translate: ˆzR = GS→R(zS ), ˆzS = GR→S (zR)

Cycle: ˜zS = GR→S (ˆ zR), ˜zR = GS→R(ˆ zS )

Update GS→R, G R→S : minimize 

Ladv + λcyc Lcyc + λid Lid 

Update DS : minimize 

−E[log DS (zS )] − E[log(1 − DS (ˆ zS ))] 

Update DR: minimize 

−E[log DR(zR)] − E[log(1 − DR(ˆ zR))] 

end 

V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate World Translation across humanoid, quadruped, and manipulator platforms, asking: 1) Can World Translation accurately predict dynamics, especially under unpredictable hidden variable evolution? 2) Does the learned representation capture meaningful structure about hidden variables and domains? 3) What components of our method are essential? 4) Does our improved dynamics modeling lead to better downstream policy transfer? 

A. Dynamics Modeling Accuracy 1) Baselines: For each platform, we create source and tar-get domains in Isaac Lab with different physics parameters, such as stiffness, damping, mass and friction, to simulate the sim-to-real domain gap for more controllable evaluation. Transition data is collected using fixed pre-trained policies. The baselines are as follows.  

> •

Direct Prediction (DirectPred): Predicts from (ot, at)

alone; error reflects hidden variable influence ht. 

> •

Raw Simulation (RawSim): Raw simulator output; error reflects influence of domain characteristics c mismatch.  

> •

Residual Dynamics (ResDyn): Predicts residual correc-tions using observation history for forward inference.  

> •

Recurrent State Space Model (RSSM): An explicit recurrent latent inference model that maintains a learned latent state from observation history, representing a more expressive history-based baseline. 

2) Evaluation Tasks: We design custom tasks on three robotic platforms (Figure 3), each with two conditions: one where ht has minimal influence (low-ht) and one where ht

significantly affects transitions (high-ht). All platforms use  

> Fig. 3. Simulation environments. Left: G1 humanoid on irregular terrain. Middle: Go2 quadruped with payload (ball in box). Right: R5 manipulator under external forces.

proprioceptive observations. Contact forces, terrain geome-try, and payload motion are therefore not observable in our setting.  

> •

G1 Humanoid: Velocity tracking on flat terrain (low-

ht) vs. irregular stepping blocks with unpredictable foot contacts (high-ht).  

> •

Go2 Quadruped: Locomotion without payload (low-ht)vs. with 5kg ball in mounted box creating unpredictable interaction forces (high-ht).  

> •

R5 Manipulator: End-effector pose tracking in its workspace (low-ht) vs. under 0–200N external force disturbances (high-ht). 

3) Single-Step Rollout: We measure single-step predic-tion error under teacher-forcing, where the model receives ground-truth observations at each step. This isolates dynam-ics modeling accuracy, since both alternatives for autoregres-sive evaluation introduce confounds: ground-truth actions are computed for a different state, and recomputing actions per method couples policy behavior with dynamics error. Figure 4 shows the dynamics modeling accuracy across platforms. DirectPred and RawSim reveal the structure of each task: Direct Prediction error reflects hidden variable influence, while Raw Simulation error reflects domain gap severity. World Translation consistently outperforms both references across all conditions. It recovers hidden variable information (improving over Direct Prediction) while cor-recting domain mismatch (improving over Raw Simulation). In high-ht conditions where DirectPred error is substantial, World Translation achieves the largest improvements (G1 Uneven: 0.035 vs. DirectPred 0.119; R5 Force: 0.401 vs. DirectPred 0.741). Residual Dynamics shows mixed results: it improves over RawSim in some conditions but shows limited gains over DirectPred in high-ht tasks. RSSM, as a more expressive history-based model, generally reduces error compared to DirectPred, with the most notable gains in high-ht conditions. Yet in high-ht conditions it remains substantially above World Translation (Go2 Payload: 0.298 vs. 0.148; R5 Force: 0.515 vs. 0.401), showing that the gap reflects a limitation of history-based inference itself rather than model capacity. Backward extraction addresses the underlying issue by inferring from outcomes. 

4) Multi-Step Rollout: Teacher-forcing isolates dynamics accuracy but does not capture error compounding under closed-loop deployment. We therefore evaluate autoregres-sive rollouts on the Go2 high-ht task, recomputing policy actions on predicted states at each step. Unlike the single-step evaluation, policy-dynamics coupling is expected here, as we are assessing closed-loop stability rather than isolated oR 

> 1

, a1 oR 

> 2

, a2 oR

> 3

oS

> 2

oS→R

> 2

oS

> 3

oS→R

> 3

e e 

> Model inference System step
> Flat Uneven
> 0
> 0.05
> 0.1
> MSE

G1 Humanoid  

> Flat Payload
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> MSE

Go2 Quadruped  

> Normal Force
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> MSE

R5 Manipulator     

> RawSim DirectPred RSSM ResDyn Ours

Fig. 4. Dynamics modeling evaluation. Left: teacher-forcing protocol where the model predicts translated observations oS→R from simulator transitions, with error e measured against ground-truth. Right: prediction error (MSE) across three platforms. For each robot, the left bar group shows the low-ht

task, and the right shows the high-ht task. DirectPred and RawSim characterize the two challenges: hidden variable influence and domain gap; RSSM and ResDyn are stronger history-based and residual baselines. World Translation consistently improves over all baselines, with the largest gains where hidden variable influence is strongest. 0 10 20 30 40 50        

> Prediction Horizon
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Divergence (%) - log scale  (a) Multi-Step Prediction Divergence
> RawSim
> DirectPred
> ResDyn
> RSSM
> Ours
> 010 20 30 40 50
> Prediction Horizon
> 10 0
> 10 1
> MSE - log scale
> (b) Multi-Step Prediction MSE
> RawSim
> DirectPred
> ResDyn
> RSSM
> Ours

Fig. 5. Multi-step rollout on Go2 high-ht task. (a) Divergence rate (fraction of rollouts where base height or velocity exceeds physical bounds). (b) Prediction MSE. RSSM and RawSim show zero divergence but RSSM MSE remains above RawSim; World Translation remains stable through horizon 30 with only ∼2% divergence at horizon 50. 

prediction quality. Figure 5 shows divergence rate and MSE over rollout horizons. RawSim shows zero divergence by construction and its MSE saturates as both predicted and ground-truth trajectories stay bounded; exceeding this level indicates non-physical rollout behavior. Without ht inference, ResDyn and DirectPred diverge rapidly; ResDyn in particular can overwrite physically invalid contact states, leading to out-of-distribution inputs. RSSM shows zero divergence but its MSE remains slightly above RawSim, without improving over the raw physics baseline. World Translation remains stable through horizon 30 and exhibits only ∼2% divergence at horizon 50. For MSE (Figure 5b), World Translation achieves the lowest error up to horizon ∼30. At longer horizons, state-overwriting methods accumulate numerical errors as cor-rected states feed back into the physics engine, raising MSE above DirectPred. However, DirectPred’s lower long-horizon MSE must be interpreted alongside its ∼20% divergence rate; accurate predictions on diverged rollouts are not mean-ingful. World Translation provides the best accuracy–stability tradeoff at operationally relevant horizons. 

B. Representation Analysis 

We analyze the representation on the ARX R5 manipulator (Section V-A.2), where external forces ( ht) and motor pa-rameters ( c) interact: the same force produces different joint responses depending on actuator stiffness. 

1) Hidden Variable Information ht: To verify that transitions preserve hidden variable information, we train lightweight decoders to predict the ground-truth hidden 

TABLE I HIDDEN VARIABLE (ht ) PREDICTION R2 FROM DIFFERENT REPRESENTATIONS . C OMBINED (ot, at, zt) RESULTS COMPARE W /O

(BASIC VAE) VS FULL MODEL , SHOWING THAT AUXILIARY COMPONENTS DO NOT COMPROMISE ht PRESERVATION .                                          

> Input w/o Full
> Baseline
> (o,a)S0.73
> (o,a)R0.66
> (ot,at,ot+1 )S0.78
> (ot,at,ot+1 )R0.73
> Combined (ot,at,zt)(o,a)S,zS0.81 0.80
> (o,a)R,zR0.68 0.72
> (o,a)S,zS→R0.67 0.68
> (o,a)R,zR→S0.75 0.78
> (o,a)S,zS→R→S0.78 0.78
> (o,a)R,zR→S→R0.67 0.67

variable ht (normalized external force) from different input representations. Table I reports the R2 score for predicting force magnitude. (ot, at) alone explains 66–73% of ht vari-ance (confirming leakage), while (ot, at, zt) matches the full transition’s predictive power (68–81% vs. 73–78%). After translation, predictive power is largely preserved (67–78%), and comparing w/o vs. Full columns shows the auxiliary components add c to zt without compromising ht retention. 

2) Domain Characteristic Information c: To verify that our auxiliary components successfully encourage zt to en-code domain characteristics, we conduct domain classifica-tion experiments. We train a binary classifier as a probe to measure how much domain information each represen-tation contains. The classifier is trained with ground-truth domain labels and directly predicts S or R from different input representations. We evaluate on: (1) (ot, at) alone to measure baseline information leakage, (2) zt alone to measure how much domain information the encoder captures, and (3) combined (ot, at, zt) to measure whether zt adds domain information beyond (ot, at). For the combined input, 

(ot, at) is always from the source domain to match the practical application scenario where we observe transitions in one domain and translate zt to another. Table II shows that without auxiliary components, zt achieves only 64– 67% domain classification (worse than (ot, at) alone at 79– 85%), and translated zS→R classifies at only 43% as R (below chance). With auxiliary components, zt reaches 94% TABLE II DOMAIN CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FROM DIFFERENT REPRESENTATIONS . “ W/O” DENOTES THE BASIC VAE WITHOUT DOMAIN CLASSIFIER AND FILM; “F ULL ” DENOTES THE COMPLETE MODEL .                                                                  

> Input Target w/o Full
> Information in (ot,at)(o,a)SS0.7894
> (o,a)RR0.8479
> Information in zt
> zSS0.6729 0.9407
> zRR0.6412 0.9365
> zS→RR0.4288 0.9124
> zR→SS0.4936 0.8327
> zS→R→SS0.7015 0.8427
> zR→S→RR0.6099 0.9820
> Combined (ot,at,zt)(o,a)S,zSS0.7857 0.9443
> (o,a)R,zRR0.8326 0.9414
> (o,a)S,zS→RR0.2702 0.9070
> (o,a)R,zR→SS0.2404 0.8309
> (o,a)S,zS→R→SS0.7952 0.8459
> (o,a)R,zR→S→RR0.8227 0.9837

Fig. 6. UMAP visualization of dynamics features on the R5 manipulator task. Left: original latent space shows domain separation reflecting c

encoded in zt. Right: after translation, zS→R (blue) aligns with real domain 

zR (orange). 

and zS→R reaches 91% as R, showing that the translated feature successfully overrides the domain signal in (ot, at).Auxiliary components are essential: without them, cross-domain prediction fails. Figure 6 visualizes the dynamics features using UMAP [32]: the original latent space shows clear domain separation (required for translation to learn meaningful mappings), and after translation, zS→R aligns with real domain features zR. Comparing w/o and Full columns in Table I confirms the auxiliary components add domain information c without removing ht.

C. Ablation Study 

We study the necessity of key design choices in World Translation. Experiments are conducted on the ARX R5 manipulator unless otherwise noted. 

1) Translation in Latent Space: We justify translating 

zt rather than observations directly by training a gener-ator that maps (ot, at, oAt+1 ) → oBt+1 at the observation level. This collapses immediately (Figure 7): since (ot, at)

alone achieves 79–85% domain classification, the discrim-inator trivially distinguishes domains without examining 

ot+1 , providing no useful gradient. Abstracting to zt iso-lates dynamics-relevant information from the domain-leaking 0 10 20 30 40 50 60         

> Training Samples (M)
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> Loss
> Generator Losses
> GAB
> GBA
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> Training Samples (M)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> Loss
> Discriminator Losses
> DA
> DB

Fig. 7. Training collapse in observation-level translation. Discriminator losses (right) drop to near-zero while generator losses (left) diverge, indicat-ing the discriminators trivially distinguish domains using (ot, at) without learning meaningful dynamics mappings. TABLE III ABLATION OF TRANSLATION COMPONENTS . C YCLE ERROR MEASURES ROUND -TRIP RECONSTRUCTION ∥z − G(G(z)) ∥; I DENTITY ERROR MEASURES UNNECESSARY MODIFICATION ∥zR − GS→R(zR)∥.Variant Cycle Error Identity Error Pred. Error Full Model 0.034 0.233 0.401 w/o Cycle Consistency 0.273 0.004 0.681 w/o Identity Loss 0.026 0.463 0.483 

(ot, at), enabling stable training. Furthermore, observation-level translation has no clear objective: without our abstract representation, there is no criterion for which dynamics properties a translated ot+1 should preserve. 

2) Translation Components: We ablate components of the CycleGAN translation network; results are in Table III. Without cycle consistency, cycle error increases 8 × (0.034 

→ 0.273) and prediction error degrades significantly; identity error drops to near-zero, indicating the generator becomes overly conservative. Without identity loss, identity error doubles (0.233 → 0.463), showing unnecessary distortion of in-domain samples. 

D. Downstream Policy Performance on Real Robot 

We conducted a real robot experiment to further evaluate whether improved dynamics modeling translates to better policy transfer in a practical sim-to-real deployment scenario. The real-world experiment setup is illustrated in Figure 8. 

1) Setup: We evaluate on the real Go2 quadruped with the payload task described earlier in Section V-A.2, where a ball moves freely inside a box mounted on the robot. All methods start from a base policy trained in simulation without domain randomization. This base policy is then fine-tuned using different adaptation strategies. The baselines are:  

> •

No Adaptation: The base policy is deployed directly without fine-tuning.  

> •

Domain Randomization: Fine-tuned with randomized physics parameters (base mass −1 to +3 kg, friction 0.3–1.2, actuator gains 0.8–1.25 ×) and additive obser-vation noise for 1000 steps.  

> •

World Translation (Ours): Fine-tuned using translated dynamics. We collect 20 minutes of real-world transi-tions using a joystick-controlled base policy, train the translation model, then fine-tune the policy for 1000 gradient update iterations using translated dynamics pre-dictions. Unpaired training reduces data requirements TABLE IV DOWNSTREAM POLICY PERFORMANCE ON GO2 WITH PAYLOAD . A LL METHODS TRACK THE SAME ANGULAR VELOCITY COMMAND .Method Tracking (rad/s) Stability (rad) Power (W) No Adaptation 0.2475 0.0517 28.07 Domain Rand. 0.3306 0.0694 21.95 World Translation 0.1786 0.0513 29.55  

> Fig. 8. Real-world deployment of the Go2 quadruped with the payload task. Left: simulation setup for training, right: real-world deployment for evaluation.

since transitions need only cover the relevant dynamics regime, unlike paired approaches that require matching samples across domains. 

2) Metrics: All policies track the same recorded com-manded angular velocity sequence, enabling controlled com-parison. We evaluate using metrics computable from propri-oceptive observations, each corresponding to a reward term during training:  

> •

Angular Velocity Tracking Error: RMSE between com-manded and measured angular velocity. Lower is better.  

> •

Orientation Stability: Root mean square of pitch and roll standard deviations, 

q

σ2 

> pitch

+ σ2

> roll

. Lower is better.  

> •

Average Power: Mean joint power consumption 1

> T

R |τ ·

˙q| dt . Lower is better. 

3) Results: Table IV shows World Translation achieves the lowest tracking error (0.18 vs. 0.25 No Adaptation, 0.33 Domain Randomization) while maintaining comparable stability and power. Domain Randomization’s lower power consumption reflects overly conservative behavior that sac-rifices responsiveness. These results confirm that improved dynamics modeling transfers to better command tracking, though effects on other metrics are modest. VI. D ISCUSSION 

A. Assumptions and Scope 

Backward dynamics extraction assumes that all dynamics information not captured in (ot, at) is recoverable from the full transition (ot, at, ot+1 ). This holds when observations are high-dimensional relative to the hidden variable effects and when ht creates distinct signatures in the outcome. Discrete contact events satisfy both conditions naturally; continuous forces have subtler effects and leave weaker sig-natures. Table I provides empirical support: the full transition achieves R2 of 0.73–0.78 for predicting external forces on the R5 task, compared to 0.66–0.73 from (ot, at) alone. A harder constraint is unmodeled phenomena : if a physical effect is entirely absent from the simulator, no translation can recover it. The simulator must capture the relevant physics, even approximately. Translation corrects how these effects manifest in dynamics, not whether they exist. 

B. Design Tradeoffs Unpaired learning versus direct supervision. World Trans-lation optimizes reconstruction, adversarial, and cycle-consistency losses on unpaired data, rather than minimizing prediction error on paired samples. This indirect optimization may sacrifice accuracy relative to direct supervision, but paired sim-real transitions with matching hidden variables are generally impossible to obtain. The tradeoff enables learning from data that would otherwise be unusable. 

Implicit representation. The learned zt captures effects of ht and c without explicit parameterization, allowing it to encode unmodeled dynamics that system identification cannot reach. The cost is interpretability: diagnosing training failures or verifying translation quality requires indirect prox-ies (domain classification accuracy, downstream prediction error) rather than direct inspection of the representation. These tradeoffs interact in practice. Adversarial training is less stable than supervised learning, and the absence of intuitive evaluation criteria makes it harder to detect silent failure modes in the latent space. 

C. Practical Challenges Tight coupling between ht and c. Translation is harder when hidden variables and domain characteristics interact. On the R5 task, external forces couple with domain-specific motor gains: the same force produces different joint re-sponses depending on actuator stiffness, making it difficult to separate what should be translated from what should be preserved. This explains the smaller improvement margins on R5 compared to locomotion tasks, where contact events are more naturally separable from motor parameters. 

State overwriting. Our alignment procedure overwrites observable states while leaving hidden simulator buffers unchanged, which can cause inconsistent physics decisions when internal state depends on observable state history. Multi-step results (Section V) show the effect remains bounded at operationally relevant horizons. Action correction methods [25]–[27] avoid this by modifying actions rather than states; combining action correction with World Trans-lation’s translated targets is a natural extension that would keep internal simulator state consistent. 

Training stability. Joint training of a VAE, blind de-coder, domain classifier, and CycleGAN involves competing objectives that require careful balancing. Empirically, the same hyperparameters transfer across all three platforms without per-platform tuning (Appendix Table II), suggesting reasonable stability in practice. 

D. Future Directions Multi-step training. Our single-step formulation accumu-lates prediction errors over long horizons. Training on tra-jectory segments with autoregressive objectives could reduce compounding errors. 

Online adaptation. Updating the translation model during deployment would address distribution shift without offline retraining. The unpaired formulation is well-suited to this: new real-world transitions can be incorporated without re-quiring simulated counterparts. 

Visual observations. Extending to image-based obser-vations would support translation for vision-based poli-cies, requiring disentanglement of visual appearance from dynamics-relevant content. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented World Translation, a framework for learned dynamics models that addresses sim-to-real transfer by re-formulating dynamics alignment as unpaired domain trans-lation over learned features. Backward dynamics extraction captures hidden variable effects from observed transitions without assuming that history is sufficient to recover them; cycle-consistent translation then maps these features across domains while preserving dynamics information. Experi-ments on humanoid, quadruped, and manipulator platforms demonstrate improved dynamics modeling, with the largest gains when history is insufficient to recover hidden variable effects, and real-robot deployment on Go2 shows improved command tracking. REFERENCES [1] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots,” Science Robotics , vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019. [2] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science robotics , vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020. [3] R. Singh, A. Allshire, A. Handa, N. Ratliff, and K. Van Wyk, “Dextrah-rgb: Visuomotor policies to grasp anything with dexterous hands,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01791 , 2024. [4] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ international con-ference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 23–30. [5] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization,” in 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) .IEEE, 2018, pp. 3803–3810. [6] I. Akkaya, M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin, B. McGrew, A. Petron, A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas, et al. , “Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113 ,2019. [7] L. Ljung, “System identification,” in Signal analysis and prediction .Springer, 1998, pp. 163–173. [8] Y. Chebotar, A. Handa, V. Makoviychuk, M. Macklin, J. Issac, N. Ratliff, and D. Fox, “Closing the sim-to-real loop: Adapting simula-tion randomization with real world experience,” in 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 8973–8979. [9] J. Josifovski, M. Malmir, N. Klarmann, B. L. ˇZagar, N. Navarro-Guerrero, and A. Knoll, “Analysis of randomization effects on sim2real transfer in reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation tasks,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 10 193–10 200. [10] W. Xiao, S. Lyu, Z. Gong, R. Wang, and D. Wang, “Learning robotic policy with imagined transition: Mitigating the trade-off between robustness and optimality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10484 , 2025. [11] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, I. Fischer, R. Villegas, D. Ha, H. Lee, and J. Davidson, “Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels,” in 

International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 2555–2565. [12] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020. [13] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap, “Mastering diverse domains through world models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 ,2023. [14] N. Hansen, H. Su, and X. Wang, “Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16828 ,2023. [15] F. Golemo, A. A. Taiga, A. Courville, and P.-Y. Oudeyer, “Sim-to-real transfer with neural-augmented robot simulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2018, pp. 817–828. [16] E. Heiden, D. Millard, E. Coumans, Y. Sheng, and G. S. Sukhatme, “Neuralsim: Augmenting differentiable simulators with neural net-works,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 9474–9481. [17] N. Sontakke, H. Chae, S. Lee, T. Huang, D. W. Hong, and S. Hal, “Residual physics learning and system identification for sim-to-real transfer of policies on buoyancy assisted legged robots,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 392–399. [18] J. Tan, T. Zhang, E. Coumans, A. Iscen, Y. Bai, D. Hafner, S. Bo-hez, and V. Vanhoucke, “Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for quadruped robots,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2018. [19] G. Tiboni, K. Arndt, and V. Kyrki, “Dropo: Sim-to-real transfer with offline domain randomization,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems ,vol. 166, p. 104432, 2023. [20] B. Mehta, M. Diaz, F. Golemo, C. J. Pal, and L. Paull, “Active domain randomization,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 1162–1176. [21] M. Deisenroth and C. E. Rasmussen, “Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy search,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-11) , 2011, pp. 465–472. [22] K. Chua, R. Calandra, R. McAllister, and S. Levine, “Deep rein-forcement learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018. [23] P. Wu, A. Escontrela, D. Hafner, P. Abbeel, and K. Goldberg, “Day-dreamer: World models for physical robot learning,” in Conference on robot learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 2226–2240. [24] J. Gao, M. Y. Michelis, A. Spielberg, and R. K. Katzschmann, “Sim-to-real of soft robots with learned residual physics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [25] J. Hanna and P. Stone, “Grounded action transformation for robot learning in simulation,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 31, no. 1, 2017. [26] H. Karnan, S. Desai, J. P. Hanna, G. Warnell, and P. Stone, “Reinforced grounded action transformation for sim-to-real transfer,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) ,2020. [27] T. He, J. Luo, W. He, T. Xiao, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, S. Fidler, Y. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Asap: Aligning simulation and real-world physics for learning agile humanoid whole-body skills,” in Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [28] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,2017, pp. 2223–2232. [29] K. Rao, C. Harris, A. Irpan, S. Levine, J. Ibarz, and M. Khansari, “Rl-cyclegan: Reinforcement learning aware simulation-to-real,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 11 157–11 166. [30] D. Ho, K. Rao, Z. Xu, E. Jang, M. Khansari, and Y. Bai, “Retinagan: An object-aware approach to sim-to-real transfer,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 10 920–10 926. [31] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [32] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 , 2018.