Title: SAIN: Structure-Aware Interactive Navigation with Active Dialogue Grounding for Mobile Robot

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.09196v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 01:55:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# SAIN: Structure-Aware Interactive Navigation with Active Dialogue Grounding for Mobile Robot 

Yuhao Cao 1, Xiao Liu 1,2, Yang Xie 1, Lu Liu 2, and Haoyao Chen 1,∗

Abstract — Most existing vision-language navigation tasks assume that instructions are complete and unambiguous. However, real-world robots often encounter natural human instructions that are ambiguous, underspecified, or incomplete, requiring them to resolve such uncertainties through active questioning. Interactive Instance Goal Navigation (IIGN) re-quires an embodied agent to find the specific instance under an ambiguous category-level instruction through active dialogue. However, existing dialogue-enabled methods often consume ora-cle answers as transient textual context for immediate decisions, rather than persistent spatial or object-centric structured state. We present SAIN, a zero-shot framework that turns active dialogue into persistent navigation state. Instead of consuming oracle answers as one-step text hints, SAIN compiles them into target evidence, route-level corridor memory, and object-candidate labels. These states are stored in structured value, room, graph, and object memories, then consumed by a unified policy for frontier ranking and final target approach. On the VL-LN IIGN benchmark, SAIN improves SR from 20.2 to 25.4 and SPL from 13.07 to 14.17 over the strongest reported dialogue-enabled baseline, while requiring no task-specific policy training. The results support dialogue-to-state conversion as an effective zero-shot mechanism for long-horizon interactive instance navigation. 

Index Terms — Vision-Language Navigation; Instance Goal Navigation; Embodied AI; Interactive Navigation. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Most existing embodied navigation tasks assume that the navigation goal is clearly specified before navigation begins. These tasks primarily evaluate whether an agent can navigate effectively once the goal has been specified, while leaving open the question of how an agent should act when the instruction itself is ambiguous. In practical indoor navigation scenarios, users often provide vague category-level instruc-tions rather than fully disambiguated target descriptions. A user may refer to “the chair” or “the cabinet” without specifying which same-category instance is intended. This requires the agent to both identify the target instance and plan a search strategy to locate it. Figure 1 contrasts instance goal navigation with the interactive dialogue setting. Interactive Instance Goal Navigation (IIGN) [1] makes this practical gap explicit. Unlike category-level ObjectNav, where reaching any instance of the requested class suf-fices, IIGN requires the agent to locate the specific in-stance among same-category distractors. This introduces two coupled sources of uncertainty. Instance uncertainty arises 

> 1

The authors are with the School of Mechanical Engineering and Au-tomation, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, P.R. China. 

> 2

The authors are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. 

> ∗

Corresponding author: Haoyao Chen. Instruction: 

> Find the white bed.
> Instance Goal Navigation Interactive Instance Goal Navigation (SAIN)
> Information question
> Q: What does the bed look like? A: This is a white bed placed between two bedside tables and on a white rug.
> 1
> Route question
> Q: Which way should I go from here? A: Walk forward, then turn left; the bedroom is on your right.
> 2
> Disambiguation question
> Q: Is this the target bed? A: Yes. It is exactly what I want!
> 3
> The robot takes the wrong way.
> Wrong route 2
> Unable to disambiguate the target
> Wrong instance 3
> Lack of concrete clues of the instance
> Insufficient information 1
> Robot Human/Oracle Target Start position Graph node
> SAIN compiles answers into persistent state for successful target search. No interaction: route and instance ambiguity remain unresolved.

Fig. 1. Our SAIN follows a dialogue-to-state design: information, route, and disambiguation answers are compiled into target evidence, route/history corridors, and object-candidate labels, which are then consumed by the navigation policy. 

because the instruction does not uniquely identify the target object. Exploration uncertainty stems from the fact that the target may lie in an unobserved branch, room transition, or corridor choice. Open-vocabulary detection can identify candidate objects, and frontier exploration can efficiently expand the observed area. However, neither mechanism de-termines which candidate matches the user’s intent or which unexplored region should be prioritized. Active dialogue offers a useful way to reduce both un-certainties. However, dialogue in navigation is only effective when the received answer can be grounded, retained, and reused over subsequent decisions. Existing methods have explored help-seeking agents, dialogue history modeling, and language-model-based guidance [2]–[5], but the resulting language feedback is often tied to the current observation or action. Once the agent moves to a new room, observes new objects, or reaches another topological branch, this short-term conditioning may no longer guide the evolving navigation state. For IIGN, the key challenge is therefore not simply to use answers as transient context, but to convert interactive answers into persistent state that can support map construction, object candidate reasoning, and long-horizon navigation. The proposed approach, SAIN, is built around the dialogue-to-state principle: conversations are converted into arXiv:2608.09196v1 [cs.RO] 10 Aug 2026 persistent internal agent state that supports long-horizon nav-igation decisions. It maintains value, room, graph, and object memories that encode search utility, room-level semantics, topological connectivity, and candidate identity. During task execution, uncertainty and ambiguity trigger active question-ing, which SAIN organizes into three types: information, route, and disambiguation questions. Rather than directly converting oracle answers into immediate actions, SAIN compiles them into persistent structured memories. Infor-mation answers update target evidence used for instance verification and room relevance scoring. Route answers are grounded to topological paths and projected into route and history corridor memories. Disambiguation answers update object-candidate labels, enabling the policy to avoid a re-jected distractor and approach a confirmed target. The policy then consumes the full state for frontier ranking, exploration, and final target approach. This architecture forms a zero-shot control loop for long-horizon interactive instance search. Ex-periments show that this dialogue-to-state principle improves the success rate in long-horizon interactive instance search without task-specific policy training. Our findings support that treating dialogue as persistent navigation state, rather than transient language context or direct action command, yields a stronger zero-shot framework for interactive instance search. Our contributions are three-fold:  

> •

We propose SAIN, a zero-shot IIGN framework that converts active dialogue into persistent navigation states encompassing target evidence, route guidance, and instance-candidate reasoning.  

> •

We introduce a structured memory design that cou-ples value, room, graph, and object maps with three complementary question types: information, route, and disambiguation questions.  

> •

We demonstrate on the VL-LN IIGN benchmark that SAIN improves SR from 20.2 to 25.4, SPL from 13.07 to 14.17, and NE from 8.84 to 8.06 over the strongest reported dialogue-enabled baseline without task-specific policy training. II. R ELATED WORK 

Our work focuses on IIGN, which lies at the intersection of goal-oriented navigation and interactive embodied naviga-tion, requiring an agent to actively ask questions and identify the intended target instance. 

A. Goal-oriented Navigation 

ObjectNav. Goal-oriented navigation [6] requires an em-bodied agent to find a specified goal in an unknown envi-ronment. Text-guided goal-oriented navigation is commonly studied as Object-goal Navigation (ObjectNav) or Instance-level Object Navigation (ION). ObjectNav [7] defines the goal as an object category, so the agent does not need to dis-tinguish among same-category instances. Existing ObjectNav methods can be broadly divided into training-based and zero-shot approaches. Training-based methods learn observation-to-action policies or vision-language aligned representations from navigation data, while zero-shot methods combine fron-tier exploration with priors from large language or vision-language models. Representative zero-shot methods include VLFM [8], L3MVN [9], and ApexNav [10]. These methods improve category-level search, but they do not address which same-category instance the user actually intends. 

Instance Goal Navigation. Instance-level goal navigation requires the agent to locate a specific instance rather than any category member. ION [11] formalizes instance-level object navigation and builds instance-level representations for target grounding. PIN [12] studies personalized instance-based nav-igation toward user-specific objects, while PSL [13] improves zero-shot instance navigation through semantic understand-ing. FindThis [14] further highlights the need for fine-grained attributes and clarification when multiple candidates satisfy the same category label. However, these methods often rely on an initial target description or local disambiguation. In contrast, our SAIN actively asks information, route, and disambiguation questions, allowing dialogue to refine both target specification and long-horizon exploration. 

B. Interactive Embodied Navigation 

Interactive embodied navigation studies how an agent communicates with a human or simulated oracle during task execution. VNLA [2] and Just Ask [3] formulate assistance mainly as low-level navigation guidance, where the agent requests help under uncertainty and receives a subgoal or next action. CVDN [4] introduces human-human navigation dialogues and uses dialogue history as navigation input. DialFRED [5] extends interactive questioning to embod-ied instruction following, and RMM [15] models naviga-tion dialogue as recursive reasoning between interlocutors. KNOWNO [16] uses conformal prediction to decide when an LLM-based planner should seek help. More recent col-laborative instance-navigation work moves closer to target ambiguity: AIUTA [17] uses uncertainty-aware interaction to reduce unnecessary human-agent dialogues, and QAsk-Nav [18] provides a reproducible question-asking benchmark for collaborative instance navigation. VL-LN Bench [1] addresses the long-horizon IIGN setting by providing alarge-scale dialogue-augmented training set and a house-level oracle that answers both exploration and disambiguation queries. However, existing methods are not specifically designed for the more open-ended and long-horizon setting. In partic-ular, end-to-end learning paradigms often leave the dialogue-to-state conversion implicit, making it difficult to inspect how answers influence maps, candidates, and future policy execution. Our SAIN addresses this limitation by compiling information answers into target evidence, route answers into graph-grounded memories, and disambiguation answers into object-candidate labels, allowing dialogue to shape long-horizon navigation rather than only the next local action. 是

1 Input Route-Grounded Exploration and Navigation Policy A. Route grounding (Input: and local graph) C. Unified Policy B. Frontier scoring Waypoint to Navigation Action RGB Image 

Depth Image 

Robot Pose Persistent State              

> Target Facts Route / History Masks
> 𝐹 ௧௔௥ 𝑀 ௧௥௢௨௧௘ /𝑀 ௧௛௜௦௧ 𝑍 ௜in 𝑂 ௧
> LMMatch Bounded DFS Route session Path proposals
> confirmed target route bonus history bonus room bonus pending candidate otherwise → target approach → candidate clarification → structured frontier exploration
> value score
> 𝑠 𝑓 = s ௩௔௟ (𝑓) × 𝑚 ௥௢௨௧௘ (𝑓) × 𝑚 ௛௜௦௧ (𝑓) × 𝑚 ௥௢௢௠ (𝑓)

Instruction 

> “Find the <instance object>”
> Candidate states
> route session / target facts /candidate states

Candidate State 

> confirmed candidate
> rejected
> pending

Target Perception and Instance Reasoning Open-vocabulary detector SAM mask extraction Entropy-aware VQA filter Candidate description Evidence refinement Similarity scoring 

3 5Structured Maps Representation   

> Object Map Graph Map Value Map Room Map
> 𝑉 ௧𝐺 ௧
> 𝑅 ௧𝑂 ௧
> Geometric Grid Map (Obstacle & Free Space)

2

Environment control command new observations 

Active Questioning and Dialogue-State Update Human/Oracle 

> Trigger: Insufficient target facts Output: Appearance/Material/ Room hints
> Information Question
> Trigger: Unqueried branch node Output: Route answer
> Route Question
> Trigger: Visible pending candidate Output: Yes / No
> Disambig. Question
> 𝐌 𝐡𝐢𝐬𝐭
> 𝐌 𝐫𝐨𝐮𝐭𝐞

Dialog Manager 

4  

> answer question Update target facts
> 𝐹 ௧௔௥
> route answer
> 𝛼 ௧
> Z୧
> Update candidate labels
> (appearance/ material/room) (soft corridors over metric map) (pending/rejected/ confirmed)
> RGB Image
> 𝛼 ௧
> branch-balanced selection
> M୰୭୳୲ୣ /
> M୦୧ୱ୲

Fig. 2. The architecture of our SAIN. The agent compiles dialogue answers into structured memories, grounds route answers to graph corridors, and uses the resulting state for frontier ranking and candidate retrieval. 

III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

We formulate Interactive Instance Goal Navigation (IIGN) [1] as a sequential decision problem with language interaction. Each episode takes place in an unseen indoor environment and contains two active roles: an embodied agent and an oracle. The agent is initialized at an unknown pose and receives an instruction such as “Search for the chair.” The actual goal is a user-intended target instance g⋆,which must be distinguished from same-category distractors. At time step t, the agent receives an observation ot (e.g. RGB-D data), a pose estimate lt, and the dialogue history 

ht. It selects an action according to a policy defined as 

at ∼ π(· | ot, l t, y 0, h t) (1) where y0 is the ambiguous category-level instruction and ht

contains the complete record of previous agent questions and oracle answers. In this work, the action is either a navigation action or an oracle-query action where 

A = {FORWARD (0 .25 m) , TURN LEFT (30 ◦),

TURN RIGHT (30 ◦), ASK , STOP } (2) When at = ASK , the agent issues a free-form natural-language question to the oracle. The oracle has privileged access to target attributes, target location, and global scene structure and returns a natural-language answer based on the query. Under this formulation, the agent must jointly decide when to move, when to ask, and when to stop. An episode is considered successful only when the agent calls S TOP 

within 0.25 m geodesic distance of a target view point of g⋆.Figure 3 provides an illustrative IIGN episode, showing how questions help resolve target and route uncertainty during exploration. IV. M ETHOD 

A. Overview 

We propose SAIN, a zero-shot Structure-Aware Interactive 

Navigation framework for Interactive Instance Goal Navi-gation. SAIN follows a dialogue-to-state principle. Oracle answers are not directly converted into actions but are compiled into persistent target evidence, route guidance, and candidate labels. As shown in Fig. 2, at time t, the agent maintains structured memory 

St = {Vt, G t, R t, O t, Ftar , M route 

t , M hist 

t } (3) where Vt is a target-level semantic value map, Gt is a topological graph map, Rt is a room-level semantic map, Ot

is a candidate object map, Ftar stores target facts collected from dialogue, M route 

t and M hist 

t encode the grounded route mask and accumulated route history mask, respectively, in Section IV-E2. Candidate labels are stored inside Ot with the corresponding object entries. As shown in Fig. 2, the navigation loop has four coupled stages: observe RGB-D and update structured memories, detect and update object candidates, ask questions when uncertainty remains actionable, and select a target, candidate waypoint, or frontier. This organization lets information questions update target facts, route questions update topolog-ical corridor memories, and disambiguation questions update the candidate labels in the object map. The unified policy layer then consumes these states through frontier ranking or target-oriented execution. 

B. Structured Maps Representation 

SAIN maintains four structured maps (Vt, G t, R t, O t).These geometry- and semantics-aware map representations provide long-term memory interfaces for subsequent explo-ration, detection, questioning, and answer understanding. Value map Vt provides a target-conditioned exploration prior over frontiers. Following VLFM [8], a BLIP-2-style matcher [19] scores each RGB view against the target prompt and projects the score into the global map. The basic frontier value is sval (ξ) = Mean( Vt(N (ξ))) , where ξ denotes the 2D map coordinate of a frontier extracted from the boundary between explored and unexplored regions, and N (ξ) is its local neighborhood. Graph map Gt skeletonizes the explored free space and simplifies it into topological nodes. Its branch and leaf nodes expose spatial uncertainty and define the path proposals used for route grounding. Room map Rt partitions explored space into room-like regions using watershed segmentation over distance-to-obstacle fields. Each region stores a mask, representative view, frontier count, and adjacency. A VLM labels repre-sentative views and selects the target-relevant room R⋆t used later for room-level frontier scoring. Object map Ot = {(ci, z i)}Nt 

> i=1

stores object-centric point clouds and candidate labels to maintain different object in-stances. GroundingDINO [20] and MobileSAM [21] produce RGB-D masks, which are backprojected into global 3D clouds and associated across frames by KD-tree point-cloud distance to preserve instance consistency over time. 

C. Target Perception and Instance Candidate Reasoning 

SAIN employs entropy-aware visual question answering (VQA) to filter unreliable observations produced by open-vocabulary detectors such as GroundingDINO. It then per-forms similarity-based instance verification by prompting the VLM to reason step by step, ultimately yielding a similarity score between the visual candidate and the accumulated tar-get context. This score determines the subsequent candidate state of each detected instance. 

1) Entropy-Aware Object Detection: Directly asking the VLM to return a discrete VQA answer can discard the model’s uncertainty about a proposal. Therefore, SAIN esti-mates detection uncertainty from the next-token logits of the VLM, rather than from the discrete answer. Inspired by CoIN [17], for each detector proposal j

with a bounding box bj on the RGB observation It, SAIN uses bj to prompt MobileSAM and obtain the mask mj .To verify whether this proposal corresponds to the target, SAIN overlays the contour of mj on It and asks the VLM whether the marked region contains the target object. With the response set defined as R := {yes , no , I don’t know }, the VLM returns a discrete verification response for proposal j:

yj := Φ vlm (It, m j , p det ) ∈ R , where pdet is the verification prompt. SAIN reads the next-token logits over this answer set, zj = [ zyes  

> j

, z no  

> j

, z unk  

> j

]. For each response r ∈ R , its normalized probability is defined as 

prj := exp( zrj )/ X

> r′∈R

exp( zr′ 

> j

)

The acceptance gate gj is defined as follows: 

gj =

(

1, yj = yes ∧ Hj < τ H ,

0, otherwise (4) where the proposal uncertainty Hj = − P 

> r∈R

prj log prj is the entropy of the probability distribution over the response set R. Intuitively, SAIN accepts only detections that the VLM labels as yes with low uncertainty, i.e., only proposals with gj = 1 are inserted as reliable candidates. 

2) Similarity-Based Instance Verification: For each ac-cepted candidate ci, SAIN further verifies whether it is the intended instance. The verification proceeds in three steps: candidate description, evidence refinement, and similarity-based state assignment. A VLM first describes the masked candidate as descriptive context di:

di := Φ vlm (It, m i, p i) (5) where mi is the mask of ci and pi is the object-centric prompt template. Then a process of evidence refinement uses the LLM to compare the candidate evidence with the target facts accumulated from information questions. Let Ftar denote the persistent target-fact set extracted from oracle answers. The LLM converts the two evidence sources into reusable verification triples, 

Qi := {(qik , a ik , u ik )}Ki 

> k=1

= Φ llm (di, Ftar ) (6) where qik is an attribute question, aik is the candidate-grounded answer, and uik ∈ { 0, 1} indicates certainty; Ki

is the number of verification triples generated for candidate 

i. SAIN keeps only certain answers and uses them to refine candidate evidence: 

˜di := Ψ( di, bFi), where bFi = {aik | uik = 1 } (7) Here, Ψ( ·) is an LLM-based evidence-refinement operator that removes ambiguous or weakly supported attributes. The refined evidence is matched against the target fact set with a normalized LLM-based similarity function, 

si := S( ˜di, Ftar ), si ∈ [0 , 1] (8) SAIN only needs a coarse partition of similarity scores. It maps the score to a candidate label with two thresholds 0 ≤

τlow < τ high ≤ 1, given as 

zi =



> REJECTED

, si < τ low ,

> PENDING

, τlow ≤ si

< τ high ,

> CONFIRMED

, si ≥ τhigh 

(9) Low, middle, and high scores correspond to non-target evidence, re-observation/disambiguation, and direct target approach respectively. Through this discriminative similarity scoring, SAIN can effectively distinguish the target instance from distractors and use the candidate state to guide subse-quent navigation. 

D. Active Questioning and Dialogue-State Update 

SAIN queries the oracle only when the current state exhibits non-trivial uncertainty or ambiguity. Following the IIGN settings, the oracle uses an LLM-assisted simulator to answer free-form questions. SAIN organizes these queries into three types, and each type updates a different state. 

Information questions are asked at episode start or when 

Ftar is insufficient; answers are parsed into target facts used by candidate scoring, room relevance, and later route t = 0 t = 14 t = 49 t = 62 t = 198 t = 230 Fig. 3. An illustrative example of Interactive Instance Goal Navigation. At t = 0 , the robot is initialized and asks an information question, e.g., “What does the washing machine look like?”; the oracle answers, “The washing machine is a white-gray, rectangular, front-loading unit in the storage room.” At    

> t= 14 , the robot asks the first route question, e.g., “What is the right path next?”; the oracle answers, “Step forward along the direction after you turn around from your current view,” and the robot enters the kitchen. The robot then continues exploration; at t= 198 , it asks a route question in the hallway and selects the correct exploration direction.

questions. Route questions are asked at unqueried branch-like nodes when no object is CONFIRMED ; the route an-swer αt is grounded to a graph path, and route sessions are updated as described in Section IV-E. Disambiguation questions are asked for a PENDING candidate only when it is close and stable across frames. The oracle answers “yes” if and only if the target is in the current view and within 3 m; the yes/no answer updates the candidate label to CONFIRMED /REJECTED .

E. Route-Grounded Exploration and Navigation Policy 

To ensure that route answers persistently guide explo-ration, SAIN grounds route answers into topological cor-ridors, injects them into frontier scoring, and switches to candidate or target goals. 

1) Route-Answer Grounding: Let vt be the nearest graph node when a route answer αt is received. SAIN performs a bounded depth-first search from vt to keep local candidate path proposals around the current node and emits paths that terminate at informative events, such as leaf nodes, branch nodes, a specified path length, significant turns, or depth limits. To avoid enumerating every path and reduce the prompt input, SAIN applies branch-balanced selection. Let Ut be the outgoing branches with at least one emitted path, and let Gu contain paths whose first branch from vt

is u. A multi-objective key ρ(p) ranks candidate paths by target-length compatibility, turn count, useful progress, and turn evidence. Given the branch set Ut, the branch-wise path pools {G u}u∈U t , the per-branch budget B, and the ranking key ρ, the local proposal set Plocal is defined as: 

Plocal := [

> u∈U t

Top B (Gu; ρ) (10) where Top B (Gu; ρ) outputs the B highest-ranked paths from branch u, so Plocal retains candidates from every available branch. Each retained path pkt ∈ Plocal is converted to a textual description ϕ(pkt ) containing initial turn, node sequence, length, and room trace. The LLM matcher uses a structured prompt that includes the route answer, candidate path descriptions, direction groups, and room context. The prompt asks the LLM to parse the user’s route intent and the ordered movement cues, filter candidates by the earliest movement direction and initial turn, compare the remaining paths by path compatibility and room-level plausibility, and finally output the selected path ID. We write this matching process as p⋆t = arg max k LMMatch( αt, ϕ (pkt )) . The se-lected path instantiates a route session Tt = ( p⋆t , C ⋆t , ¯C⋆t , η t),where ηt is a completion flag, C⋆t is the short-term route corridor around the selected nodes, and it ends when the agent reaches the corridor endpoint or when a new route corridor is instantiated; ¯C⋆t is the history corridor extended from the terminal direction of the selected path, and it persists over the episode and decays when new history corridors are added. 

2) Route Mask and Frontier Scoring: Route answers provide directional guidance for frontier selection. SAIN uses two masks with different time scales for later frontier decisions: the route mask M route  

> t

gives a strong short-term bias around the selected corridor, while the route history mask M hist  

> t

preserves a decaying bias along the extended route direction. From the route session Tt = ( p⋆t , C ⋆t , ¯C⋆t , η t) obtained from route-answer grounding, SAIN projects the short-term corridor C⋆t into a route mask M route  

> t

, given as: 

M route  

> t

(x) = 1 + βr exp 



− dist( x, C ⋆t )2

2σ2

> r



(11) where x is a 2D map coordinate and dist( x, ·) is the distance to the corridor centerline. The history corridor ¯C⋆t yields a longer-lived route history mask M hist  

> t

, given as: 

M hist  

> t

(x) = 1 + Ht(x) (12) where the history field is updated recursively as 

Ht(x) = γH t−1(x) + βh exp 



− dist( x, ¯C⋆t )2

2σ2

> h



.

The room-level prior for the selected target-relevant room is 

M room  

> t

(x) = 1 + βroom 1[x ∈ R⋆t ] (13) where σr , σ h are spatial spreads with σh > σ r , γ controls decay, and R⋆t is the target-relevant room selected from the room map Rt in Sec. IV-B. In our implementation, these parameters are empirically set to βr = 3 .0, βh = 0 .5 with 

γ = 0 .8, and βroom = 0 .25 .Let Ξt denote the set of frontier coordinates. For each ξ ∈

Ξt, SAIN first reads the value sval (ξ) from Vt, then converts route, history, and room priors into bounded multiplicative terms. Concretely, mroute (ξ) and mhist (ξ) are obtained by respectively averaging M route  

> t

and M hist  

> t

over N (ξ), while 

mroom (ξ) is computed from the room-level exploration prior 

M room  

> t

induced by R⋆t . The final frontier score is computed by: 

s(ξ) = sval (ξ) · mroute (ξ) · mhist (ξ) · mroom (ξ) (14) where unavailable priors are set to 1. The exploration goal is ξ⋆ = arg max ξ∈Ξt s(ξ).

3) Target-Oriented Execution: When a candidate is 

> PENDING

, the exploration goal is replaced by the nearest navigable waypoint near the candidate for verification. Once a candidate becomes CONFIRMED , the agent stops explo-ration and executes PointGoal navigation [6] to the confirmed instance. V. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 

Benchmark. We evaluate SAIN on the VL-LN bench-mark [1] under the Interactive Instance Goal Navigation 

setting in Habitat, where the agent starts from an ambiguous category-level goal and must locate the target instance in an unseen scene while optionally asking natural-language questions. 

Experimental Design. We evaluate the overall perfor-mance of SAIN through the main benchmark, budget anal-ysis, module ablations, dialogue-type and failure-case anal-yses, and real-world robot trials in unknown indoor scenes. The main benchmark compares three groups:  

> •

Zero-shot no-dialogue baselines. Frontier-based ex-ploration (FBE) [22] repeatedly selects the nearest frontier and uses an open-vocabulary detector built on GroundingDINO and MobileSAM to detect the target instance; VLFM [8] provides a vision-language frontier-map baseline.  

> •

Learning-based VL-LN baselines. VLLN-I/D are ini-tialized from Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct and trained on instance-goal and interactive instance navigation data, respectively.  

> •

Zero-shot dialogue-enabled baselines. SAIN-D0 dis-ables dialogue, SAIN-D1 allows one information ques-tion, and SAIN-D uses an unlimited budget to query the oracle. 

Evaluation Metrics. We report success rate (SR), success weighted by path length (SPL), oracle success (OS; whether ever reached within 3 m of the target), navigation error (NE), average steps, average question count (Avg Q), and mean success per question (MSP). Different from the MSP computation in VL-LN, we recompute all MSP in this paper using (SR − SR baseline )/Avg Q, where SR baseline is the no-dialogue success rate of the corresponding method family. SAIN uses SAIN-D0 as the baseline, while VLLN-D is recomputed against VLLN-D0. 

Implementation Details. SAIN is evaluated in the zero-shot regime without task-specific policy training. The imple-mentation uses GroundingDINO [20] and MobileSAM [21]                                                                          

> TABLE I MAIN IIGN BENCHMARK RESULTS ON VL-LN.
> Method SR ↑SPL ↑OS ↑NE ↓Steps ↓Avg Q ↓MSP ↑
> FBE 8.4 4.74 25.2 11.84 ---VLFM 10.2 6.42 32.4 11.17 ---VLLN-I 14.2 8.18 47.8 9.54 ---VLLN-D0 15.4 9.86 55.2 9.17 -0.00 0.00 VLLN-D 20.2 13.07 56.8 8.84 -1.76 2.73 SAIN-D0 11.6 1.56 56.0 10.65 468.2 0.00 0.00 SAIN-D1 20.6 10.43 44.2 9.63 248.4 1.00 9.00
> SAIN-D 25.4 14.17 46.0 8.06 217.6 4.58 3.02

for proposal generation and segmentation, and Qwen3.5 [23] for multimodal reasoning in target-evidence use, route-answer grounding, and candidate judgment. For dialogue-budget studies, a budget tuple (Ninfo , N route , N disamb ) de-notes the maximum number of information, route, and dis-ambiguation questions allowed in one episode. The module ablations keep the same policy and selectively remove the similarity verifier, room bonus, route bonus, history bonus, or entropy gate to isolate the contribution of each state component. 

B. Main IIGN Benchmark Results 

The main results compare SAIN and its variants with other zero-shot or learning-based methods. Table I first shows zero-shot no-dialogue baselines. FBE and VLFM reach 8.4 and 10.2 SR, respectively, indicating that category-level open-vocabulary search alone is insufficient for resolving the intended instance. The learning-based VL-LN baseline VLLN-I improves this result and reaches 14.2 SR, while adding dialogue training in VLLN-D raises SR to 20.2 and SPL to 13.07. The SAIN variants isolate the effect of dialogue-to-state conversion without task-specific policy training. SAIN-D0 disables dialogue and reaches 11.6 SR, showing that its zero-shot perception and mapping stack is competitive with non-dialogue zero-shot baselines but still insufficient for final instance retrieval. With one information question, SAIN-D1 rises to 20.6 SR and 10.43 SPL, matching the learning-based dialogue baseline while using only one question on average. SAIN-D obtains the best final retrieval performance, improving SR from 20.2 to 25.4 and SPL from 13.07 to 14.17 over VLLN-D, while reducing NE from 8.84 to 8.06. SAIN-D asks 4.58 questions on average and has lower OS than VLLN-D, which suggests that the agent tends to stop at candidates with high similarity scores, reducing the chance of incidentally passing through oracle-success regions during broader exploration. The MSP column shows that the largest marginal gain comes from the first information question, while the full dialogue budget yields the best absolute SR and SPL. 

C. Question-Budget Analysis 

Question-budget analysis examines how both question quantity and question type affect SAIN’s final performance. t=20s (info question & verification) t=85s (route question) t=107s (route question)   

> t=215s (exploration) t=344s (disambiguation question) t=382s (navigation to the target)

Fig. 4. Real-world deployment of SAIN for finding a wooden table surrounded by chairs, with a red rose placed on it. The sequence shows a representative full navigation episode, including 360 ◦ initialization, information question, route question, object detection, similarity-based instance verification, disambiguation question, and final approach to the target. 

Table II reports the completed single-role-constrained bud-gets, the balanced (1 , 1, 1) setting, and the SAIN-D setting. 

TABLE II DIALOGUE -BUDGET ANALYSIS . T HE TUPLE REPORTS MAXIMUM INFORMATION , ROUTE , AND DISAMBIGUATION QUESTIONS .                                                                   

> Variant Budget SR ↑SPL ↑OS ↑NE ↓Avg Q ↓MSP ↑
> No Dialogue (0 ,0,0) 11.6 1.56 56.0 10.65 0.00 0.00 Info Only (1 ,0,0) 20.6 10.43 44.2 9.63 1.00 9.00
> Info+Route (1 ,3,0) 22.6 12.77 50.6 8.72 2.67 4.13 Info+Disamb (1 ,0,3) 17.4 10.00 37.2 10.10 1.84 3.16 Balanced (1 ,1,1) 22.0 12.95 43.2 8.88 2.14 4.85 SAIN-D (1 ,∞,∞)25.4 14.17 46.0 8.06 4.58 3.02

The completed budget rows show four stable patterns. First, one information question recovers most of the dialogue benefit and still gives the highest MSP. Second, allocating extra route questions improves absolute SR, SPL, OS, and NE over the information-only setting, which indicates that route answers mainly help regional search rather than final disambiguation alone. Third, the balanced (1 , 1, 1) budget reaches 22.0 SR and 12.95 SPL with only 2.14 questions on average, giving a stronger efficiency trade-off than the route-only extension even though its absolute SR is slightly lower. Fourth, the disambiguation-only extension remains the weakest multi-question setting because candidate confirma-tion is useful only after exploration has already produced plausible instances. The SAIN-D budget remains the best in final SR and SPL, but it achieves that gain by spending more questions than the constrained variants. 

D. Module Ablations 

Module ablations assess how the dialogue-to-state com-ponents affect SAIN’s final performance. The similarity-verifier ablation removes SAIN’s similarity-based instance verification pipeline and replaces it with a direct VLM prompt that takes the RGB image and target information as input and outputs YES /UNCERTAIN /NO . The room-bonus, route-bonus, and history-bonus ablations disable their cor-responding value-map priors, while the VQA filter ablation removes the entropy-aware VQA filter that suppresses un-reliable target detections. Table III summarizes the resulting performance changes. 

TABLE III MODULE ABLATIONS OF SAIN.                                                         

> Variant SR ↑SPL ↑OS ↑NE ↓Avg Steps ↓Avg Q ↓MSP ↑
> SAIN-D 25.4 14.17 46.0 8.06 217.6 4.58 3.02
> w/o Similarity Verifier 24.0 11.02 70.0 7.49 409.4 9.08 1.37 w/o Room Bonus 24.0 13.56 48.2 7.50 221.8 4.52 2.75 w/o Route Bonus 19.0 10.69 41.4 9.15 229.9 4.75 1.56 w/o History Bonus 20.8 11.19 40.0 9.46 234.3 4.76 1.93 w/o VQA Filter 20.0 12.05 38.0 9.04 176.9 4.28 1.96

The ablations support two main conclusions. First, final navigation success depends on persistent instance state mem-ories rather than simply reaching target-like regions: without the similarity verifier, OS rises to 70.0 and NE falls to 7.49, but SPL drops to 11.02 while steps and questions increase sharply. Second, route-grounded memory is the strongest spatial prior. Removing the route bonus causes the largest performance drop among the value-prior ablations, reducing SR to 19.0 and SPL to 10.69. 

E. Failure-Case Analysis 

To analyze dialogue-induced failure modes, we classify failed episodes into Wrong Detection (WD), Ambiguity (Ambig.), Exploration Fail (Expl.), and Stop Fail (ST): WD reaches the correct region at least once but does not suc-cessfully terminate, Ambig. denotes stop-terminated failures outside oracle success, Expl. never reaches oracle success without a final STOP, and ST stops near the target with 

0.25 < NE < 1.0. Table IV reports the resulting taxonomy from final action traces. 

TABLE IV FAILURE TAXONOMY (COUNT (%) OF FAILED EPISODES ). 

Variant WD Ambig. Expl. ST No Dialogue 212 (48.0%) 106 (24.0%) 114 (25.8%) 10 (2.3%) Info Only 98 (24.7%) 198 (49.9%) 81 (20.4%) 20 (5.0%) Info+Route 123 (31.8%) 185 (47.8%) 62 (16.0%) 17 (4.4%) Info+Disamb 82 (19.9%) 225 (54.5%) 89 (21.5%) 17 (4.1%) Balanced 97 (24.9%) 199 (51.0%) 85 (21.8%) 9 (2.3%) SAIN-D 93 (24.9%) 191 (51.2%) 79 (21.2%) 10 (2.7%) 

The failure taxonomy in Table IV shows two main effects of dialogue. First, dialogue reduces wrong detection from 48.0% without dialogue to 24.9% under SAIN-D, indicating that target evidence and candidate-state updates improve final instance selection. Second, ambiguity becomes the main remaining bottleneck, reaching 51.2% under SAIN-D, while route questions mainly improve search by reducing exploration failures to 16.0% in Info+Route. 

F. Real-world Demonstration 

We conducted a physical experiment on a wheeled mobile robot equipped with an Intel RealSense D435i depth camera and an RTX 4090M GPU. All SAIN modules, including mapping, perception, dialogue-state updates, and navigation control, run onboard; only the VLM is accessed through HTTP requests to an external server. Robot odometry is estimated by running FAST-LIO [24] with a Livox Mid-360 LiDAR. We further conducted a series of quantitative real-world trials; the detailed execution process is provided in the supplementary video. Figure 4 shows one representative case in which our robot navigates to a specific wooden table. At the beginning, the robot performs a 360 ◦ scan and asks the user to provide a more specific target description. During exploration, the robot asks route questions such as “Where should I go next?”, and the user responds with concrete path instructions that are grounded into route proposals. The route question’s path proposals are represented as gray arrow lines and the selected path as a purple arrow line. After detecting plausible table candidates, the robot performs instance-level verification and asks a disambiguation question at t = 344 s, e.g., “Is this the table you want?”, and the user answers, “Yes, that is it.” The robot then navigates to the confirmed target, and the gold point cloud indicates the final target instance. This case demonstrates that SAIN can execute the full dialogue-to-state pipeline on a physical robot and complete long-horizon IIGN navigation beyond simulation. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presents SAIN, a zero-shot IIGN framework that converts oracle answers into structured navigation states, including target evidence, route memories, and candidate labels. Without task-specific policy training, SAIN improves SR and SPL over the strongest reported dialogue-enabled baseline and transfers to a real wheeled robot. Failure anal-ysis indicates that final instance-level verification remains the main bottleneck. Future work should study stronger candidate verification and finer disambiguation questions for high-similarity candidates to make a more reliable IIGN agent. REFERENCES [1] W. Huang, S. Zhu, M. Wei, J. Xu, X. Liu, H. Wang, T. Wang, F. Zhao, and J. Pang, “VL-LN bench: Towards long-horizon goal-oriented navigation with active dialogs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22342 ,2025. [2] K. Nguyen, D. Dey, C. Brockett, and B. Dolan, “Vision-based naviga-tion with language-based assistance via imitation learning with indirect intervention,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR) , 2019, pp. 12 527–12 537. [3] T.-C. Chi, M. Eric, S. Kim, M. Shen, and D. Hakkani-Tur, “Just ask: An interactive learning framework for vision and language navigation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , vol. 34, no. 3, 2020, pp. 2459–2466. [4] J. Thomason, M. Murray, M. Cakmak, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Vision-and-dialog navigation,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn. (CoRL) , vol. 100, 2020, pp. 394–406. [5] X. Gao, Q. Gao, R. Gong, K. Lin, G. Thattai, and G. S. Sukhatme, “DialFRED: Dialogue-enabled agents for embodied instruction fol-lowing,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 10 049–10 056, 2022. [6] P. Anderson, A. X. Chang, D. S. Chaplot, A. Dosovitskiy, S. Gupta, V. Koltun, J. Koˇ seck´ a, J. Malik, R. Mottaghi, M. Savva, and A. R. Zamir, “On evaluation of embodied navigation agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757 , 2018. [7] D. Batra, A. Gokaslan, A. Kembhavi, O. Maksymets, R. Mottaghi, M. Savva, A. Toshev, and E. Wijmans, “ObjectNav revisited: On evaluation of embodied agents navigating to objects,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13171 , 2020. [8] N. Yokoyama, S. Ha, D. Batra, J. Wang, and B. Bucher, “VLFM: Vision-language frontier maps for zero-shot semantic navigation,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , 2024, pp. 42–48. [9] B. Yu, H. Kasaei, and M. Cao, “L3MVN: Leveraging large language models for visual target navigation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) , 2023, pp. 3554–3560. [10] M. Zhang, Y. Du, C. Wu, J. Zhou, Z. Qi, J. Ma, and B. Zhou, “ApexNAV: An adaptive exploration strategy for zero-shot object navigation with target-centric semantic fusion,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 11 530–11 537, 2025. [11] W. Li, X. Song, Y. Bai, S. Zhang, and S. Jiang, “ION: Instance-level object navigation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia , 2021, pp. 4343–4352. [12] L. Barsellotti, R. Bigazzi, M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, and R. Cucchiara, “Personalized instance-based navigation toward user-specific objects in realistic environments,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) ,vol. 37, 2024, pp. 11 228–11 250. [13] X. Sun, L. Liu, H. Zhi, R. Qiu, and J. Liang, “Prioritized semantic learning for zero-shot instance navigation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Com-put. Vis. (ECCV) , 2024, pp. 161–178. [14] A. Majumdar, F. Xia, B. Ichter, D. Batra, and L. Guibas, “FindThis: Language-driven object disambiguation in indoor environments,” in 

Proc. Conf. Robot Learn. (CoRL) , vol. 229, 2023, pp. 1335–1347. [15] H. R. Roman, Y. Bisk, J. Thomason, A. Celikyilmaz, and J. Gao, “RMM: A recursive mental model for dialogue navigation,” in Find-ings of ACL: EMNLP . ACL, 2020, pp. 1732–1745. [16] A. Z. Ren, A. Dixit, A. Bodrova, S. Singh, S. Tu, N. Brown, P. Xu, L. Takayama, F. Xia, J. Varley, Z. Xu, D. Sadigh, A. Zeng, and A. Majumdar, “Robots that ask for help: Uncertainty alignment for large language model planners,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn. (CoRL) ,vol. 229, 2023, pp. 661–682. [17] F. Taioli, E. Zorzi, G. Franchi, A. Castellini, A. Farinelli, M. Cristani, and Y. Wang, “Collaborative instance object navigation: Leveraging uncertainty-awareness to minimize human-agent dialogues,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV) , 2025, pp. 18 781–18 792. [18] E. Zorzi, F. Taioli, Y. Wang, M. Cristani, A. Farinelli, A. Castellini, and L. Bazzani, “Benchmarking interaction, beyond policy: A reproducible benchmark for collaborative instance object navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.00265 , 2026. [19] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “BLIP-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , vol. 202, 2023, pp. 19 730–19 742. [20] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, Q. Jiang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection,” in 

Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV) , 2024, pp. 38–55. [21] C. Zhang, D. Han, Y. Qiao, J. U. Kim, S.-H. Bae, S. Lee, and C. S. Hong, “Faster segment anything: Towards lightweight SAM for mobile applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14289 , 2023. [22] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robot. Autom. (CIRA) , 1997, pp. 146–151. [23] Qwen Team, “Qwen3.5: Accelerating productivity with native multi-modal agents,” https://qwen.ai/blog?id=qwen3.5, Feb. 2026. [24] W. Xu and F. Zhang, “FAST-LIO: A fast, robust LiDAR-inertial odometry package by tightly-coupled iterated Kalman filter,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3317–3324, 2021.