Title: CoRDE: Concept-Prior Routed Diffusion Experts for Structural Generalization in Robot Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21935v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:33:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# CoRDE: Concept-Prior Routed Diffusion Experts for Structural Generalization in Robot Manipulation 

Haidong Huang 1,5, Xixin Zhao 1, Yaohua Zhou 1, Jiayu Song 1, Jiayi Zhang 5,Jun Ma 4, Haiyue Zhu 3, Xiaocong Li 1,2,3†

Abstract — Diffusion models excel at capturing multi-modal action distributions in robot imitation learning. However, in multi-task and long-horizon scenarios, monolithic architectures lack structural generalization capabilities, suffering from gra-dient conflicts between distinct semantic sub-stages. While pure data-driven Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) methods introduce labor division, they frequently trigger routing collapse, and instantiating full-scale experts causes parameter explosion and high expansion costs. To address these issues, we propose Concept-prior Routed Diffusion Experts (CoRDE), a structure-guided variational distillation framework. CoRDE extracts semantic distributions from a frozen concept encoder to guide the variational posterior responsibility via a learnable soft map-ping matrix. This mechanism introduces an entropy-controlled responsibility inference process that encourages confident rout-ing under reliable semantic predictions while preserving the stochastic diffusion term for behavioral diversity. To overcome parameter inflation, CoRDE employs a parameter-efficient expert pool using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on a shared frozen backbone. Theoretical analysis shows that the mixture score discrepancy is bounded by responsibility-weighted local expert errors, supporting high-fidelity generation under low-rank expert adaptation. Empirical evaluations confirm that, compared to existing baselines, CoRDE systematically reduces routing collapse, forming robust, semantically aligned expert allocations while achieving superior action quality and incre-mental learning efficiency. 

I. INTRODUCTION It is well established that diffusion models, which for-mulate action generation as a conditional denoising process, have become a dominant paradigm in robot imitation learn-ing [1]–[4]. By learning the score function within the action space, diffusion policies excel at capturing highly complex, multi-modal, and continuous data distributions inherent in human demonstrations. This expressive capability allows robots to replicate diverse human behaviors with unprece-dented trajectory smoothness and high task success rates. Despite these significant advances, deploying monolithic diffusion policies in multi-task and long-horizon scenarios reveals severe structural limitations. Forcing a single set of global parameters to simultaneously represent behavioral 

> 1College of Information Science and Technology, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, Ningbo 315200, China
> 2Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Industrial Intelligence and Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, Ningbo 315200, China
> 3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Univer-sity of Singapore, Singapore 117583
> 4Robotics and Autonomous Systems Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511453, China
> 5Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Nottingham Ningbo China, Ningbo 315100, China
> †Corresponding author: xiaocongli@eitech.edu.cn

modes with drastically heterogeneous frequency properties inevitably induces gradient conflicts [5]–[8] and catastrophic interference. Furthermore, their iterative denoising nature incurs substantial inference latency, while intractable like-lihoods complicate post-hoc policy optimization. To mitigate these bottlenecks, recent research transforms pre-trained diffusion policies into Mixture of Experts (MoE) architectures [9]–[11], notably via Variational Distillation of Diffusion (VDD) [12]. Simultaneously, other expert-driven manipulation frameworks [13], [14] have been utilized to decompose manipulation skills. However, existing unsuper-vised MoE frameworks [12], [14], [15] are constrained by fundamental contradictions: when processing noisy multi-modal data, pure data-likelihood-driven routing frequently triggers routing collapse [12] and distorts the naturally un-even distribution of physical tasks [15]. Additionally, the resulting expert populations lack human-interpretable seman-tic boundaries, and instantiating full-scale experts causes parameter explosion. In this article, we present Concept-prior Routed Diffusion Experts (CoRDE), a novel structure-guided variational dis-tillation system that seamlessly unifies high-level semantic concept priors [16], [17] with the generative expressivity of diffusion MoE models. Our approach extracts a stable semantic distribution from a frozen concept encoder to guide the variational posterior responsibility via a learnable soft mapping matrix. This enforces a dual-entropy dynamics con-servation: minimizing routing entropy for macroscopic cer-tainty, while preserving the full-rank variance of the stochas-tic diffusion term [18] to maintain behavioral diversity. To overcome parameter inflation, we construct an expert pool by injecting Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [19] modules onto a shared frozen backbone. We provide rigorous mathematical proofs demonstrating that the mixture score field of low-rank experts strictly approximates the teacher distribution in the L2 sense [12], theoretically guaranteeing high-fidelity generation while avoiding rank-deficiency-induced diversity loss [20], [21]. This work addresses the structural generalization challenge in multi-modal robot manipulation:  

> •

We propose a structure-guided variational diffusion distillation framework that integrates a concept-prior-driven responsibility mechanism, mitigating routing col-lapse and encouraging semantically aligned expert allo-cation.  

> •

We design a parameter-efficient diffusion expert pool utilizing LoRA. Theoretical analysis shows that this ar-

> arXiv:2606.21935v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jun 2026

chitecture reduces computational overhead while main-taining action diversity through the stochastic diffu-sion term and supporting high-fidelity generation via bounded score approximation.  

> •

We develop an Expectation-Maximization (EM) style self-organizing soft alignment algorithm, establishing an interpretable many-to-many mapping between macro-scopic task concepts and microscopic execution experts. II. RELATED WORKS 

A. Diffusion Policies for Multi-Task Manipulation 

Diffusion policies, which formulate action generation as a conditional denoising process, have emerged as a baseline for robotic visuomotor control [1], [3], [4]. However, as application scenarios expand to long-horizon and multi-task environments, existing monolithic diffusion policies expose architectural limitations. Forcing a single network to simultaneously fit behavioral modes with drastically dif-ferent frequency characteristics (e.g., low-frequency large-scale spatial navigation versus high-frequency fine-grained contact) inevitably induces gradient conflicts [5]. During end-to-end optimization, gradients dominating large-scale mobility frequently interfere with or override the learning of fine manipulation features [7]. Consequently, the structural generalization upper bounds of monolithic diffusion policies are strictly limited in multi-task scenarios due to representa-tional interference caused by globally coupled parameters. 

B. Mixture of Experts and Policy Distillation 

To break through the capacity bottlenecks of monolithic networks, Mixture of Experts (MoE) architectures have been introduced to enable dynamic decomposition of the ma-nipulation space. For diffusion policies, the skill-abstracted MoE (SMP) [13] and force-aware MoE (ForceVLA) [14] explore cross-modal feature routing; the Variational Distil-lation of Diffusion (VDD) method [12] utilizes variational inference to distill pre-trained diffusion policies into MoE models for inference acceleration. Nevertheless, existing MoE manipulation frameworks universally exhibit structural flaws. Their routing mechanisms rely heavily on pure data likelihood, which, when processing noisy continuous data, frequently falls into winner-takes-all local optima and trig-gers routing collapse [12]. Forced heuristic load-balancing losses, imposed to counteract collapse, distort the naturally uneven distribution of physical tasks [15]. Furthermore, these statistically evolved expert populations lack human-interpretable semantic boundaries, making them susceptible to unpredictable routing jitter and action confusion. 

C. Concept Representations and Parameter-Efficient Adap-tation 

Extracting high-level semantic priors and controlling the scale of parameter expansion form an effective path to enhance deployment efficiency. Studies such as HiMaCon [17] and AutoCGP [16] confirm the feasibility of extracting manipulation concept distributions from unlabeled multi-modal data. However, when applying these concepts to guide low-level policies, existing methods typically adopt hard-assignment bindings [17]. Such rigid boundaries directly fracture the continuous topological manifolds of underlying physical actions, inducing decision mutations during phase transitions. At the parameter control level, Low-Rank Adap-tation (LoRA) [19] significantly reduces the computational overhead of incremental learning. Yet, in high-dimensional continuous action generation, pure low-rank updates possess inherent rank deficiency [20]. More severely, if the stochastic diffusion term—which maintains the full-rank property of the generative distribution in the Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) [18]—is improperly compromised when introducing low-rank constraints, it directly impairs the behavioral diver-sity of the system. How to establish a soft concept mapping mechanism to eliminate MoE routing collapse and parameter inflation, without destroying the full-rank behavioral variance of diffusion models, remains an unresolved void. III. METHODOLOGY This section formulates the Concept-prior Routed Diffu-sion Experts (CoRDE) framework. We first establish the variational distillation of monolithic diffusion policies into a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture. Subsequently, we construct the structure-guided responsibility inference mech-anism, present the parameter-efficient expert parameteriza-tion with rigorous error bounds, and detail the self-organizing alignment updates. 

A. Preliminaries: Distilling a Diffusion Policy into MoE 

Diffusion policies model action generation as a con-ditional denoising process. Given a demonstration dataset 

D = {(oi, a 0,i )}, the forward process injects Gaussian noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ) into the clean action sequence a0 at continuous timestep t ∈ (0 , T ], yielding the noisy action 

at = αta0 + σtϵ. The monolithic diffusion policy is trained to predict the injected noise via the score-matching proxy objective [1]: 

Ldiff = Eo,a 0,t,ϵ 

∥ϵ − ϵθ (at, o, t )∥22

 , (1) where ϵT denotes the pre-trained teacher noise predictor. This objective is mathematically equivalent to matching the true score field of the data distribution, i.e., uT (at, o, t ) = 

−ϵT (at, o, t )/σ t ≈ ∇ at log pt(at|o). For strict theoretical coherence, subsequent derivations utilize the score field notation u.To overcome the intractable likelihood and elevated infer-ence latency of diffusion models, the Variational Distillation of Diffusion (VDD) method [12] compresses the pre-trained continuous teacher into a single-step MoE student policy: 

qϕ(a|o) = 

> K

X

> z=1

qψ (z|o)πθ (a|o, z ), (2) where z ∈ {1, . . . , K } indexes the experts, and qψ (z|o)

designates the gating network. VDD optimizes a decomposi-tional variational upper bound, allowing individual experts to be trained independently. However, unsupervised MoE rout-ing driven exclusively by data likelihood persistently induces Fig. 1. Overview of the CoRDE framework: During training, a frozen concept encoder processes multi-modal observations to extract semantic distributions. A learnable soft mapping matrix projects these semantics into a structural prior, which geometrically fuses with behavioral evidence to infer the variational responsibility posterior. This mechanism enforces dual-entropy dynamics, allocating tasks to a parameter-efficient expert pool built with Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) on a shared frozen backbone. At inference, state-conditioned routing dynamically activates specialized experts. By preserving the stochastic diffusion term, the resulting mixture score field guarantees full-rank behavioral diversity and synthesizes high-fidelity action sequences. 

routing collapse or mode-averaging [12], [15]. This systemic instability motivates the integration of macroscopic structural priors to regularize the underlying routing dynamics. 

B. Overall Framework of CoRDE 

CoRDE restructures the pre-trained diffusion teacher into a scalable, semantically aligned MoE. As illustrated in Fig. 1, a frozen concept encoder first extracts a stable semantic distri-bution pϕ(c|o) from multi-modal observations. A continuous soft mapping matrix PCE (z|c) projects these conceptual semantics into a structural expert prior pstruct (z|o). During the Expectation step (E-step), this prior fuses geometrically with the behavioral evidence derived from the teacher’s local score field, yielding a variational responsibility pos-terior q∗(z|o, a 0). During the Maximization step (M-step), the system utilizes this inferred responsibility to allocate samples across a parameter-efficient expert pool, instantiated exclusively via Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) modules [19] operating on a shared, frozen diffusion backbone. 

C. Structure-Guided Responsibility Inference and Entropy Dynamics 

To systematically eliminate routing collapse, CoRDE im-poses cognitive certainty by guiding expert assignments with high-level semantics. Following representation paradigms like HiMaCon [17], we deploy a frozen concept encoder to obtain the distribution pϕ(c|o) over C semantic clusters. To facilitate a many-to-many labor division where the expert count K operates independently of C, we formulate the structural prior using the soft mapping matrix PCE (z|c)

(satisfying PKz=1 PCE (z|c) = 1 ): 

pstruct (z|o) = 

> C

X

> c=1

pϕ(c|o)PCE (z|c). (3) Concurrently, the behavioral evidence r(z|o, a 0) quantifies the local score-fitting precision of expert z, defined as 

r(z|o, a 0) = qψ (z|o) exp( −∥ uT − u(z) 

> θ

∥22). Let ¯r(z|o, a 0)

denote the normalized evidence. To unify the macroscopic semantic structure and microscopic behavioral evidence, we construct a structure-regularized variational objective: 

min  

> ˜q

Eo,a 0 [KL (˜ q∥¯r) + λ(o)KL (˜ q∥pstruct )] , (4) where λ(o) ≥ 0 controls the structural guidance strength. 

Proof of Optimal Posterior: We formulate the Lagrangian of Eq. (4) subject to the constraint P 

> z

˜q(z) = 1 :

L(˜ q, ν ) = X

> z

˜q(z) ln ˜q(z)¯r(z|o, a 0) + λ(o) X

> z

˜q(z) ln ˜q(z)

pstruct (z)+ ν X

> z

˜q(z) − 1

!

.

Setting the partial derivative ∂L  

> ∂˜q(z)

= 0 yields: 

(1+ λ(o)) ln ˜ q(z) = ln ¯ r(z|o, a 0)+ λ(o) ln pstruct (z)−(1+ λ(o)+ ν).

Solving for ˜q(z) yields the optimal variational responsibility posterior q∗(z|o, a 0) as an exact geometric mean: 

q∗(z|o, a 0) = 1

Z(o, a 0) ¯r(z|o, a 0) 11+ λ(o) pstruct (z|o) λ(o)1+ λ(o) ,

(5) where Z(o, a 0) is the partition function. The parameter λ(o) anneals adaptively based on the nor-malized concept confidence γ(o) = 1 − H(pϕ(c|o)) / log C.Assigning λ(o) = λmax γ(o) guarantees robust fallback to evidence-driven allocation under ambiguous semantic states. 

Theorem 1 (Routing Entropy Bound): As the structural guidance strength approaches infinity ( λ(o) → ∞), the entropy of the responsibility posterior mathematically binds to the structure prior: lim λ→∞ H(q∗) = H(pstruct ). When 

pstruct is confident, this fusion biases the posterior toward lower routing entropy and more stable expert assignment. 

D. Parameter-Efficient LoRA Experts and L2 Score Approx-imation 

Instantiating full-scale diffusion networks for individual experts inflates parameters prohibitively. Therefore, the stu-dent policy shares a frozen diffusion transformer trunk 

hη (o). Expert differentiation relies solely on Attention-LoRA modules injected into the linear projection layers. For expert 

z, the weight is parameterized as W (z) = W0 + B(z)A(z),subject to the rank constraint r ≪ d.During the M-step, each expert minimizes the responsibility-weighted score-matching discrepancy against the teacher score uT :

Lexpert (z) = Eo,a 0,t,ϵ [·] (6) 

Theorem 2 (Mixture L2 Score Approximation): Let 

˜u(at, o, t ) ≜ PKz=1 q∗(z|o, a 0)u(z) 

> θ

(at, o, t ) denote the com-bined score field of the student experts. Utilizing Jensen’s inequality regarding the strict convexity of the squared L2

norm (i.e., ∥ P wixi∥2 ≤ P wi∥xi∥2 for P wi = 1 ), the global score discrepancy is bounded by the weighted sum of local expert errors: 

∥uT −˜u∥22 =

> K

X

> z=1

q∗(z)( uT − u(z) 

> θ

)

> 22

≤

> K

X

> z=1

q∗(z)∥uT −u(z) 

> θ

∥22.

(7) This result shows that local score matching within the assigned responsibility regions upper-bounds the global ap-proximation error. 

Remark (Full-Rank Diversity Conservation): Pure low-rank parameter updates in generative formulations frequently exhibit rank deficiency [20], culminating in diversity loss. However, action generation in CoRDE obeys the reverse Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) [18]: 

da t =

h

f (at, t ) − g2(t)u(z) 

> θ

(at, o, t )

i

dt + g(t)d ¯w. (8) The LoRA increments exclusively modify the deterministic drift term to adjust modality means. Critically, the standard Wiener process g(t)d ¯w constantly injects full-rank isotropic noise. This structural decoupling ensures that the behav-ioral entropy remains maximized, perfectly preserving multi-modal action diversity regardless of the low-rank constraint on the neural network parameters. 

E. Router Decoupling and EM Soft Alignment 

To stabilize the routing network qψ (z|o) and circumvent gradient conflicts [7], we explicitly decouple its optimization from the downstream score-matching task. The router trains exclusively via Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence against the inferred responsibility posterior: 

Lrouter = Eo,a 0 [KL (q∗(·| o, a 0)∥qψ (·| o))] . (9) Furthermore, the soft mapping matrix PCE evolves through an Expectation-Maximization (EM) style self-organizing update. Using the mini-batch soft assignment counts Nc,z = P 

> i

pϕ(c|oi)q∗(z|oi, a 0,i ), we apply Dirichlet smoothing ( α) to construct the target distribution: 

ˆPCE (z|c) = Nc,z + α

P 

> z′

Nc,z ′ + Kα . (10) The matrix then refines via an Exponential Moving Average (EMA): PCE ← (1 − η)PCE + η ˆPCE . This statistical evo-lution establishes an interpretable mapping between macro-scopic concepts and microscopic experts without backprop-agation instability. 

F. Algorithms: Training and Inference 

The integration of the aforementioned mathematical mod-ules into the CoRDE framework is decoupled into an offline variational distillation phase and an online state-only exe-cution phase, summarized in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, respectively. 

Algorithm 1 CoRDE Phase I: Variational Distillation (Train-ing) 

Require: Dataset D = {(oi, a 0,i )}, pre-trained teacher uT ,concept encoder pϕ, frozen trunk hη , LoRA experts 

{B(z), A (z)}, router ψ, mapping PCE . 

> 1:

while not converged do  

> 2:

Sample mini-batch {(oi, a 0,i )} ∼ D  

> 3:

for each sample i do  

> 4:

Extract semantic prior pϕ(c|oi) and compute con-fidence γ(oi) 

> 5:

Construct structural prior pstruct (z|oi) via Eq. (3)  

> 6:

Sample timestep t ∼ U(0 , T ) and noise ϵ ∼N (0 , I ) 

> 7:

Compute behavioral evidence r(z|oi, a 0,i ) via local score error  

> 8:

Infer responsibility posterior q∗(z|oi, a 0,i ) via Eq. (5) ▷ E-step  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

M-step 1 (Experts): Update LoRA to minimize P 

> z

Lexpert (z) (Eq. (6))  

> 11:

M-step 2 (Router): Update ψ via Lrouter against posterior q∗ (Eq. (9))  

> 12:

M-step 3 (Mapping): Update PCE via Dirichlet soft counts and EMA  

> 13:

end while Algorithm 2 CoRDE Phase II: State-Only Execution (Infer-ence) 

Require: Observation o, frozen pϕ, optimized PCE , trained router ψ, LoRA experts.  

> 1:

Semantic Extraction:  

> 2:

Extract pϕ(c|o) and evaluate structural prior 

pstruct (z|o) 

> 3:

State-Only Routing:  

> 4:

Compute raw routing logits hz (o) from decoupled router ψ 

> 5:

Inject structural bias: ˜hz (o) = hz (o)+ β log pstruct (z|o) 

> 6:

Select active experts based on softmax( ˜hz (o))  

> 7:

SDE Denoising Generation:  

> 8:

Initialize noisy action aT ∼ N (0 , I ) 

> 9:

for t = T, . . . , 1 do  

> 10:

Predict local scores u(z) 

> θ

(at, o, t ) using activated LoRA experts  

> 11:

Compute mixture score field ˜u =

P 

> z∈top-k

qψ (z|o)u(z) 

> θ
> 12:

Denoise at → at−1 via SDE solver utilizing the mixture score ˜u 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return Clean action sequence a0

IV. EXPERIMENTS We systematically evaluate the CoRDE framework across two representative robot imitation learning benchmarks: LIBERO [22] for assessing overall success rates and cross-suite structural generalization in long-horizon, multi-task manipulation, and D3IL [23] for validating the preservation of multi-modal behavioral coverage (Task Entropy) and inference efficiency. Our empirical evaluations are designed to answer the following three core questions:  

> •

(1) Performance: Does CoRDE significantly outper-form the monolithic Diffusion Policy and structure-free distilled MoE across complex multi-task suites?  

> •

(2) Routing Mechanism: Does the low routing entropy in CoRDE reflect genuine semantic structural alignment rather than pathological expert collapse?  

> •

(3) LoRA Experts & Multimodality: Can the parameter-efficient CoRDE-LoRA architecture maintain superior task success rates while preserving high behav-ioral entropy and reducing inference time? 

A. LIBERO: Long-Horizon Multi-Task Performance 1) Experimental Setup: To evaluate the structural gener-alization capabilities, we utilize four standard suites from the LIBERO benchmark: L-Spatial, L-Object, L-Goal, and L-Long. We report the task success rate, computed over multiple random seeds, alongside the macro-average (Mean) across all suites to ensure balanced evaluation. We compared our framework with the following methods: 1) Diffusion Policy (Teacher): The standard baseline. 2) Distill-MoE (Evidence-only): A VDD-based student MoE trained relying strictly on microscopic data like-lihood, without structural prior regularization. 3) CoRDE (HiMaCon encoder): Our framework utiliz-ing self-supervised concepts [17]. 4) CoRDE (AutoCGP encoder): Our framework utiliz-ing unsupervised discovered concepts [16]. 

Fairness and Capacity Control: To ensure rigorous attribution of performance gains, all distilled student methods (Distill-MoE and both CoRDE variants) share the identical parameter budget and architecture: the exact same shared frozen trunk, identical expert count K, matched LoRA configurations, and equivalent training steps. The singular independent variable is the integration of the structural prior during the E-step responsibility inference. Furthermore, we emphasize that both CoRDE variants utilize completely 

label-free concept encoders to output pϕ(c|o), synthesizing the structural prior pstruct (z|o) = P 

> c

pϕ(c|o)PCE (z|c) with-out any human semantic annotation. 

2) Main Results: The quantitative results, summarized in Fig. 2, demonstrate that CoRDE consistently outperforms the Distill-MoE (evidence-only) baseline across all four standard suite, yielding the highest overall macro-average. Notably, this performance enhancement is most pro-nounced in the L-Long and L-Goal suites, which inherently possess the strongest multi-stage semantic structures and temporal dependencies. This observation empirically vali-dates that the injected structural prior stabilizes the expert as-signment process, conferring robust resistance against com-pounding errors during extended task execution horizons. Furthermore, empirical data indicates that the evidence-only Distill-MoE occasionally surpasses the monolithic Teacher diffusion policy on specific subsets. This reflects the inherent architectural advantages of MoE for phase-wise modeling in long-horizon tasks. However, the overall performance of the evidence-only MoE remains inferior to CoRDE. This discrepancy confirms that the substantial per-formance leap originates specifically from our joint respon-sibility inference—fusing semantic structure with behavioral evidence—rather than merely the deployment of an MoE architecture. Finally, the consistent gains observed with both HiMaCon and AutoCGP prove that effective structural expert division can be acquired via self-organization without relying on manual concept annotations. 

B. D3IL: Action Diversity and Inference Efficiency 1) Experimental Setup & Metrics: While LIBERO eval-uates structural generalization across distinct tasks, it does not explicitly quantify the preservation of human behavioral diversity within a single task. To address this, we evaluate our framework on the D3IL benchmark [23], which pro-vides highly multi-modal human demonstrations. We select seven core tasks: Avoiding, Aligning, Pushing, Stacking-1, Stacking-2 (state-based), as well as Sorting and Stacking (image-based). To comprehensively validate the parameter-efficient LoRA expert pool, we compare CoRDE (using HiMaCon and Au-Fig. 2. Success rates on the LIBERO benchmark. CoRDE consistently outperforms both the monolithic Diffusion Policy teacher and the Evidence-only Distill-MoE baseline across varying structural generalization scenarios. 

toCGP) against the monolithic Diffusion Policy (DP) teacher and the full-parameter Variational Distillation of Diffusion (VDD) baseline. The evaluation relies on three metrics:  

> •

Task Success Rate: Measures the fidelity of the action generation.  

> •

Task Entropy: Quantified on a scale from 0 to 1,assessing whether the model successfully captures and reproduces the diverse, multi-modal solutions demon-strated by humans.  

> •

Inference Time: Measures the computational latency. 

2) Main Results and Analysis: The quantitative results presented in Table I establish the theoretical soundness of the CoRDE architecture across all three evaluated dimensions: 

High-Fidelity Action Generation (Score Inheritance): 

Across both state-based and image-based D3IL tasks, CoRDE variants match or exceed the Task Success Rate of the monolithic DP and the full-parameter VDD. This empirical evidence directly corroborates our Theorem 2(Mixture L2 Score Approximation): the low-rank capacity of the LoRA adapters is mathematically sufficient to inherit and accurately reconstruct the complex score function (denoising gradient field) of the teacher policy within their specifically assigned semantic regions. 

Prevention of Mode Collapse (Diversity Conservation): 

A common vulnerability in imitation learning—particularly when introducing low-rank constraints—is the manifesta-tion of abnormally low behavioral entropy, a phenomenon widely known as “mode collapse”. In such cases, the policy regresses to a deterministic, averaged trajectory, failing to encompass the diverse human skills. Remarkably, CoRDE achieves Task Entropy scores closely approximating the original multi-modal DP teacher, and significantly higher than standard deterministic baselines. This confirms the theoretical assertion formulated in our Methodology: while the LoRA modules efficiently approximate the deterministic drift term, the preservation of the SDE’s stochastic diffusion term guarantees the full-rank variance of the generative distribution, strictly maintaining action diversity. 

Inference Efficiency: Inference with distilled MoE mod-els circumvents the need for an iterative denoising process, thereby substantially accelerating sampling. Following the evaluation protocol established in prior works [12], we eval-uate the inference time on the state-based pushing task and report the average results from 200 predictions. In addition to the absolute inference time in milliseconds (ms), we report the Number of Function Evaluations (NFE) in Table II for rigorous comparability. As demonstrated, while the monolithic DP relies on an iterative process with a large NFE yielding 55.62 ms latency, CoRDE achieves single-step generation (NFE=1) in just 2.63 ms—slashing the inference time by an order of magnitude. These results indicate that CoRDE achieves inference efficiency comparable to VDD (Distill-MoE) without sacrificing action generation quality. Furthermore, unlike standard full-parameter MoE models which instantiate complete neural network copies for each expert, CoRDE restricts expert parameters exclusively to LoRA weights on a shared trunk, effectively bypassing the parameter explosion dilemma. 

3) Qualitative Visualization of Multimodal demonstration: 

Beyond task success, D3IL explicitly targets behavioral diversity by providing human demonstrations with multiple distinct solution modes per task, making it a stringent bench-mark for diagnosing mode collapse in imitation learning. For instance, the Avoiding task contains a large set of quali-TABLE I COMPARISON OF TASK SUCCESS RATE AND TASK ENTROPY ON THE D3IL BENCHMARK . C ORDE MAINTAINS HIGH SUCCESS RATES WHILE STRICTLY PRESERVING BEHAVIORAL DIVERSITY , AVOIDING THE MODE COLLAPSE TYPICALLY ASSOCIATED WITH LOW -RANK APPROXIMATIONS .

Environment Task Success Rate ↑ Task Entropy ↑

DP (Teacher) VDD (Distill-MoE) CoRDE (HiMaCon) CoRDE (AutoCGP) DP (Teacher) VDD (Distill-MoE) CoRDE (HiMaCon) CoRDE (AutoCGP) Avoiding 0.62 ± 0.08 0.93 ± 0.01 0.92 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0.01 0.72 ± 0.07 0.78 ± 0.06 0.79 ± 0.09 0.87 ± 0.03 

Aligning 0.74 ± 0.12 0.85 ± 0.04 0.82 ± 0.05 0.88 ± 0.04 0.38 ± 0.09 0.38 ± 0.07 0.48 ± 0.07 0.47 ± 0.04 

Pushing 0.74 ± 0.07 0.86 ± 0.02 0.88 ± 0.04 0.93 ± 0.01 0.66 ± 0.08 0.72 ± 0.08 0.74 ± 0.01 0.76 ± 0.08 

Stacking-1 0.73 ± 0.04 0.69 ± 0.04 0.83 ± 0.08 0.86 ± 0.09 0.36 ± 0.08 0.44 ± 0.09 0.54 ± 0.05 0.64 ± 0.05 

Stacking-2 0.56 ± 0.07 0.48 ± 0.05 0.72 ± 0.04 0.68 ± 0.01 0.24 ± 0.03 0.27 ± 0.04 0.38 ± 0.05 0.36 ± 0.07 

Sorting (Image) 0.78 ± 0.04 0.74 ± 0.08 0.93 ± 0.02 0.82 ± 0.08 0.23 ± 0.03 0.28 ± 0.07 0.41 ± 0.03 0.49 ± 0.07 

Stacking (Image) 0.62 ± 0.07 0.76 ± 0.08 0.78 ± 0.02 0.85 ± 0.02 0.12 ± 0.03 0.32 ± 0.04 0.53 ± 0.03 0.48 ± 0.02 

TABLE II INFERENCE TIME IN THE STATE -B ASED PUSHING TASK . I N ADDITION TO ABSOLUTE TIME (MS ), WE REPORT THE NUMBER OF FUNCTION 

EVALUATIONS (NFE) FOR RIGOROUS COMPARABILITY . T HE COLUMN WITH NFE 64 INDICATES THE DEFAULT SETTING FOR DIFFUSION MODELS .

NFE 1 8 32 64 

DP (Teacher) 2.46 9.71 29.47 55.62 VDD (Distill-MoE) 2.16 – – –CoRDE 2.63 – – –

Fig. 3. Visualization of the D3IL benchmark tasks used in our evaluation. D3IL is designed to stress-test imitation learning under highly multi-modal human demonstrations. Left: Avoiding admits many distinct successful solutions, illustrated by diverse trajectories. Right: representative scenes of 

Arranging , Inserting , Stacking , and Pushing .

tatively different collision-free strategies, while tasks such as Aligning /Pushing /Sorting /Stacking exhibit multi-modality induced by alternative contact choices, object-goal assign-ments, and different feasible interaction sequences [23]. Figure 3 visualizes the task suite and highlights this inherent multi-modality: even within a fixed task specification, the demonstrations form multiple valid trajectory families rather than a single canonical path. This property makes D3IL particularly suitable for evaluating whether a distilled policy preserves the diversity of human behaviors instead of regress-ing to an averaged, deterministic solution, a failure mode also emphasized in diffusion-to-MoE distillation studies [12]. 

C. Ablation Study: What Stabilizes Routing and Preserves Diversity? 

We ablate the key design choices in CoRDE that are responsible for concept–expert decoupling and stable re-sponsibility inference . All variants follow the same train-ing protocol as the main experiments and are built upon 

CoRDE (AutoCGP encoder) as the default setting, so that the effect of each removed component can be isolated without introducing human concept labels. To evaluate each design choice from complementary perspectives, we report 

LIBERO Mean Success for task performance, D3IL Task Success and Task Entropy for behavioral diversity, and a set of routing diagnostics that explicitly distinguish structured specialization from expert collapse .

Routing diagnostics. Let z ∈ { 1, . . . , K } denote the expert index and o the observation. We compute: 

Hroute ≜ Eo[H(qψ (z | o))] , (11) 

Hpost ≜ E(o,a 0)[H(q∗(z | o, a 0))] , (12) 

u(z) ≜ Eo[qψ (z | o)] , PPL ≜ exp( H(u)) , (13) where H(p) = − P 

> z

p(z) log p(z). Intuitively, Hroute mea-sures routing uncertainty at inference, Hpost measures respon-sibility uncertainty in the E-step, and PPL measures global expert usage (collapse typically manifests as PPL ≈ 1). 

How to read Table III. (i) Removing PCE tests whether concept–expert decoupling is necessary. Without the soft concept-to-expert alignment, the concept space is forced to bind to the expert space too rigidly, which typically weakens semantic consistency, reduces robustness, and degrades rout-ing diagnostics. (ii) Fixing λ(o) tests whether uncertainty-aware annealed fusion is necessary. A large fixed λ over-trusts the semantic prior under concept ambiguity and can inject incorrect structural bias, whereas a small fixed λ

degenerates toward evidence-only routing and fails to exploit semantic structure. (iii) Evidence-only distillation provides a strong lower bound in which responsibilities are driven solely by behavioral evidence. This variant can retain part of the task performance, but usually yields higher routing uncertainty, weaker expert structure, and lower behavioral diversity than full CoRDE. (iv) Removing responsibility supervision from the router tests whether routing can be stably learned without fitting the inferred posterior. In this case, expert usage typically becomes more imbalanced and the collapse risk increases, supporting our central claim that CoRDE stabilizes routing by supervising the router with 

inference-derived responsibilities rather than task gradients. TABLE III ABLATION STUDY . E ACH VARIANT REMOVES ONE MECHANISM FROM THE FULL CORDE PIPELINE . W E REPORT LIBERO MEAN SUCCESS FOR TASK PERFORMANCE , D3IL SUCCESS /ENTROPY FOR BEHAVIORAL DIVERSITY , AND ROUTING DIAGNOSTICS (HROUTE , HPOST , PPL ) TO DISTINGUISH STRUCTURED SPECIALIZATION FROM EXPERT COLLAPSE .

Variant LIBERO D3IL Routing / Collapse Diagnostics Mean Success 

↑

Success 

↑

Task Entropy 

↑

Hroute 

↓

Hpost 

↓

PPL 

↑

Full CoRDE (AutoCGP) 0.87 0.85 0.58 0.28 0.19 3.6 w/o PCE (identity mapping) 0.76 0.74 0.37 0.42 0.28 2.3 w/o adaptive λ(o) (fixed λ) 0.82 0.67 0.52 0.18 0.14 1.4 Evidence-only (Distill-MoE; λ(o) = 0 ) 0.79 0.76 0.32 0.33 0.26 2.9 Router w/o responsibility supervision 0.62 0.59 0.37 0.12 0.33 1.1 

V. C ONCLUSION 

We presented CoRDE (Concept-prior Routed Diffusion Experts), a concept-guided diffusion-to-experts framework for robust and interpretable multi-task robot manipulation. CoRDE injects a semantic structural prior from a frozen con-cept encoder and a learnable concept-to-expert soft mapping, and combines this prior with action evidence through a re-sponsibility inference mechanism to obtain stable expert as-signments without relying on task-gradient-driven routing. To achieve scalable deployment, we build a parameter-efficient expert pool by freezing a shared diffusion backbone and training only per-expert LoRA adapters with responsibility-weighted score matching, which preserves both action fi-delity and multi-modal behavioral diversity. Experiments on LIBERO and D3IL demonstrate that CoRDE improves task success, maintains higher behavioral diversity, and signifi-cantly accelerates inference compared to strong diffusion and distillation baselines. Future work will explore richer open-vocabulary concepts, online adaptation under distribution shifts, and broader real-world validation. REFERENCES [1] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” in 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [2] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , 2024. [3] T. Pearce, T. Rashid, A. Kanervisto, D. Bignell, M. Sun, R. Georgescu, S. V. Macua, S. Z. Tan, I. Momennejad, K. Hofmann et al. ,“Imitating human behaviour with diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10677 , 2023. [4] M. Reuss, M. Li, X. Jia, and R. Lioutikov, “Goal-conditioned imi-tation learning using score-based diffusion policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02532 , 2023. [5] S. Fan, Q. Yang, Y. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Che, Q. Liu, and M. Wan, “Dif-fusion trajectory-guided policy for long-horizon robot manipulation,” 

IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters(RAL) , 2025. [6] A. Huang, J. Chen, J. Cheng, R. Song, W. Pan, and W. Zhang, “Skill-aware diffusion for generalizable robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11266 , 2026. [7] B. Liu, X. Liu, X. Jin, P. Stone, and Q. Liu, “Conflict-averse gradient descent for multi-task learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, 2021. [8] R. Huang, S. Zhu, Y. Du, and H. Zhao, “Moe-loco: Mixture of experts for multitask locomotion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08564 , 2025. [9] A. Prasad, K. Lin, J. Wu, L. Zhou, and J. Bohg, “Consistency policy: Accelerated visuomotor policies via consistency distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07503 , 2024. [10] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, K. Maziarz, A. Davis, Q. Le, G. Hinton, and J. Dean, “Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 , 2017. [11] D. Lepikhin, H. Lee, Y. Xu, D. Chen, O. Firat, Y. Huang, M. Krikun, N. Shazeer, and Z. Chen, “Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic sharding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16668 , 2020. [12] H. Zhou, D. Blessing, G. Li, O. Celik, X. Jia, G. Neumann, and R. Lioutikov, “Variational distillation of diffusion policies into mixture of experts,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,vol. 37, pp. 12 739–12 766, 2024. [13] C. Hao, X. Zhai, Y. Liu, and H. Soh, “Abstracting robot manipulation skills via mixture-of-experts diffusion policies,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21251 [14] J. Yu, H. Liu, Q. Yu, J. Ren, C. Hao, H. Ding, G. Huang, G. Huang, Y. Song, P. Cai et al. , “Forcevla: Enhancing vla models with a force-aware moe for contact-rich manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22159 , 2025. [15] N. M. Shafiullah, Z. Cui, A. A. Altanzaya, and L. Pinto, “Behavior transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 22 955–22 968, 2022. [16] P. Zhou, R. Liu, Q. Luo, F. Wang, Y. Song, and Y. Yang, “AutoCGP: Closed-loop concept-guided policies from unlabeled demonstrations,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=9ehJCZz4aM [17] R. Liu, P. Zhou, Q. Luo, L. Sun, J. Cen, Y. Song, and Y. Yang, “Hima-con: Discovering hierarchical manipulation concepts from unlabeled multi-modal data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11321 , 2025. [18] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2011.13456 [19] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen et al. , “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.” 

Iclr , vol. 1, no. 2, p. 3, 2022. [20] P. Albert, F. Z. Zhang, H. Saratchandran, C. Rodriguez-Opazo, A. van den Hengel, and E. Abbasnejad, “Randlora: Full-rank parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00987 [21] Y. Zeng and K. Lee, “The expressive power of low-rank adaptation,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17513 [22] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone, “Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310 , 2023. [23] X. Jia, D. Blessing, X. Jiang, M. Reuss, A. Donat, R. Lioutikov, and G. Neumann, “Towards diverse behaviors: A benchmark for imitation learning with human demonstrations,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=6pPYRXKPpw