Title: HiMe: Hierarchical Embodied Memory for Long-Horizon Vision-Language-Action Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.03449v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 01:09:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# HiMe: Hierarchical Embodied Memory for Long-Horizon Vision-Language-Action Control 

## Li Ji 1,2,∗ Siyin Wang 1,2,∗,‡ Pengfang Qian 1,2 Xiaopeng Yu 1 Yihai Tian 2,3

## Zhaoye Fei 1 Jingjing Gong 2,† Xipeng Qiu 1,2,†

1Fudan University 2Shanghai Innovation Institute 3East China Normal University 

> ∗

Equal Contribution ‡Project Lead †Corresponding Author 24210240184@m.fudan.edu.cn, siyinwang20@fudan.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Current Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models excel at robotic manipulation but often struggle with non-Markovian tasks requiring long-term memory and reasoning due to their reliance on immediate observations. Existing solutions face a “frequency-competence paradox,” where stronger reasoning models are too slow for real-time control, while faster models lack sufficient reasoning capabilities. To resolve this architectural misalignment, we propose HiMe , a Hierarchical Embodied Memory framework that decouples embodied intelligence into a high-frequency Executor for execution, a Sentry for working memory, and a Planner for long-term strategy. We also introduce a dynamic knowledge system based on cross-modal semantic schemas and active management mechanisms, allowing robots to maintain memory plasticity through “Add, Update, and Delete” operations. This hierarchical design effectively balances the conflict between real-time execution and slow thinking planning, significantly improving success rates in long-horizon tasks. Experiments demonstrate that this approach not only outperforms flat memory baselines but also exhibits the novel ability to self-correct its internal knowledge based on human preferences.  

> Code:

https://github.com/HappyWaterXP/HiMe 

## 1 Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have emerged as a powerful paradigm for general-purpose robotic manipulation with large-scale internet-level pretraining [1, 2]. By directly mapping observations to control signals, they provide a powerful foundation for executing complex motor skills. Most existing architectures rely on the Markov assumption, where the policy 𝑝 (𝑎 𝑡 |𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑙 ) predicts the action 𝑎 𝑡 at time step 𝑡 conditioned only on the transient observation 𝑜 𝑡 at the current time step and the language instruction 𝑙 . This inherent limitation prevents them from maintaining a persistent belief of the environment in non-Markovian settings. Consequently, VLAs struggle with complex, long-horizon tasks that demand long-range temporal depen-dencies, where the optimal action depends on a chain of past events or latent information that is no longer visible in the current sensory stream. 1                                        

> arXiv:2607.03449v1 [cs.RO] 3 Jul 2026 Pick
> Bin 1…
> Find all
> Alice ‘stoys
> Text memory: alice ’s
> toys is duck
> Vision memory: bin
> 1is empty
> Working memory:
> Subtask 1done
> Vision memory ：
> bin 2is empty
> Pick up
> in bin 1
> Vision memory ：
> bin 1has duck
> Update
> Pick up
> in bin 1
> Episode Memory
> Planner
> Sentry
> Executor
> EPISODE MEM
> (Multimodal)
> WORKING MEM
> TRANSIENT
> MEM
> Large VLM:
> Slow Think
> Small VLM:
> Fast Think
> VLA
> Update
> Add
> Delete
> retrieve
> HiMe :Hierarchical Embodied Memory
> Working memory ：
> Subtask 2done

Figure 1 Overview of HiMe. (a) A motivating example illustrating the need to maintain and update task-relevant mul-timodal memory across long-horizon subtasks. (b) The HiMe framework, which addresses this challenge by organizing embodied intelligence into a hierarchical structure that separates fast execution from memory-driven reasoning over long time scales. 

To overcome these limitations, one intuitive approach is to imbue VLA models with native memory capabil-ities through specialized training or auxiliary losses [3, 4]. However, these training-based methods are often constrained by limited context windows and the inherent difficulty of optimizing long-range causal depen-dencies over hundreds of steps. Another alternative is to introduce Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) as high-level memory containers to store and retrieve historical trajectories [5]. Yet, real-time robotic control imposes a strict upper bound on the deployable VLM scale, as control demands high-frequency, low-latency execution. This scale constraint, in turn, limits the internal world knowledge and generalization capabilities of the VLM, weakening its zero-shot performance. Importantly, most memory operations do not intrinsically require high-level reasoning or broad generalization. As illustrated in Fig. 1, motivated by this temporal and scale mismatch, we introduce HiMe , a Hierarchical Embodied Memory framework that decouples embodied intelligence into three functional layers with dis-tinct temporal resolutions, mirroring the multi-store structure of human cognition. (1) The Executor (VLA) 

governs transient memory , focusing on high-frequency sensory-motor coordination for physical stability. (2) The Sentry acts as the guardian of working memory (short-term memory); it asynchronously filters the continuous sensory stream to identify critical state transitions, effectively bridging the gap between raw per-ception and semantic events. (3) The Planner manages episodic memory (long-term memory). By invoking the “slow-thinking” Planner only at the discrete junctions identified by the Sentry, our architecture pre-serves deep strategic reasoning while maintaining real-time execution, effectively resolving the frequency-capability paradox. However, a static memory hierarchy alone is insufficient for the complexities of real-world human-robot interaction, which is characterized by: (1) multimodal richness , where human instructions carry dense logi-cal constraints and latent preferences [6], such as designating a specific red cup as “Alice’s cup”, that are nearly impossible to capture through vision-only trajectories; and (2) high dynamism , where task goals and environment states are not static but evolve. A memory system that only supports passive accumulation [5] inevitably suffers from knowledge stagnation and cognitive dissonance when faced with such outdated or conflicting experiences. Furthermore, our Hierarchical Memory framework treats memory as a multimodal, dynamic knowledge system centered around two fundamental dimensions: 

(1) What to memorize?: Cross-modal Semantic Schemata. To bridge the gap between raw perception and logi-cal intent, we represent episodic memory as an object-centric system where visual experiences are deeply anchored with high-density textual descriptions. This organization allows the Planner to retrieve not only vi-2sual features but also the underlying ownerships, procedural rules, and human preferences that are invisible in pure pixel space. 

(2) How to memorize?: Active Management Mechanism. In contrast to passive storage, we introduce explicit Add ,

Update , and Delete operations to grant the robot knowledge plasticity. When the Sentry detects a significant state transition or a revision in user intent, the Planner proactively refines the knowledge base. By updating outdated beliefs and purging redundant or erroneous data, the agent maintains a consistent and concise memory that evolves in alignment with the environment. We evaluate our method across a suite of challenging long-horizon manipulation tasks that require multi-step reasoning and adaptation to shifting human preferences. Experimental results show that our approach significantly outperforms existing flat-memory baselines in both success rate and computational efficiency. Notably, our agent demonstrates the ability to “self-correct” its internal knowledge base when faced with conflicting instructions, a capability that is absent in prior retrieval-based methods. Our core contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose a Hierarchical Memory Management framework that decouples robotic control into tran-sient (Executor), working (Sentry), and episodic (Planner) memory layers, resolving the granularity conflict in long-horizon VLA tasks. • We introduce a Cross-modal Memory organization ( what to memorize ) combined with an Active Man-agement mechanism ( how to memorize ), enabling the robot to maintain knowledge plasticity and align-ment in highly dynamic and multimodal interactions. • We provide extensive empirical evidence demonstrating that our hierarchical, self-evolving memory architecture achieves superior performance and robustness in complex human-robot collaborative sce-narios with significantly reduced VLM computational overhead. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Foundation models in robotics 

Recent advancements in End-to-End Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models adopt a co-training paradigm that integrates a pre-trained VLM backbone with a dedicated action expert [2]. By harnessing the VLM’s extensive world knowledge [7] to interpret complex scenes, this approach effectively transforms the backbone into a generalist agent capable of mapping raw observations directly to continuous actions. Alternatively, the hierarchical paradigm decouples reasoning from execution [8–10]. In this framework, a high-level policy, typically a VLM, processes visual observations and task descriptions to generate intermediate goals, such as natural language sub-tasks or latent embeddings. These intermediate representations then condition a low-level policy to output continuous actions. Building upon this hierarchical structure, our work introduces a novel hierarchical memory architecture designed to empower the high-level VLM to generate more precise and context-aware instructions for the low-level controller. 

2.2 Robotic memory 

Memory is essential for robotic agents operating in long-horizon, partially observed manipulation tasks, where successful execution depends on retaining past observations, inferred world states, and user-specific context. Prior work has explored different mechanisms for incorporating historical information into robotic control. One major direction introduces memory at the policy level, primarily to improve local action gen-eration, spatial grounding, and short-range temporal consistency. These approaches either augment Vision-Language-Action models with retrieval-style memory banks that store and retrieve relevant past context [4, 11–13], or encode history into compact representations such as past tokens or visual traces for history-conditioned action prediction [3, 14]. 3Executor      

> Subtask Image Executor Action

…     

> Reasoning Query Retrieved
> memory
> Memory editing
> Planning
> Buffer
> Procedural Memory Contextual Memory
> Alice
> likes
> …

Subtask 

Transient Memory 

… …   

> Uniformly Sampled 8Frames

Sentry      

> Recent Frames Sentry Done/ Active

Working Memory 

Planner (1) (2) (3)                                

> Add Update
> Delete
> Toys should
> be placed …
> 1. [DONE] …
> 2. [DONE] …
> 3. [ACTIVE] …
> 4. [PENDING] …
> 1. [DONE] …
> 2. [DONE] …
> 3. [ACTIVE] …
> 4. [PENDING] …
> 1. [DONE] …
> 2. [DONE] …
> 3. [ACTIVE] …
> 4. [PENDING] …

Episodic Memory Figure 2 Architecture of HiMe. The Sentry module serves as a real-time monitor, periodically tracking the Executor’s progress and buffering visual observations. Upon detecting the completion of a subtask, it triggers the Planner to review the entire execution trajectory. The Planner then performs memory retrieval and consolidation to update the contextual memory and refines the procedure memory. Finally, the refined instruction is fed back to the Sentry to resume monitoring the Executor, forming a robust closed-loop system. 

Another line of work studies memory in more structured, higher-level decision processes. Hierarchical embodied-agent systems [15–17] highlight the importance of explicit planning, reflection, and multimodal memory for long-horizon reasoning. MemER [5] further organizes experience using a FIFO queue with keyframe selection, demonstrating that memory supports not only short-range control but also the mainte-nance of task-level context over extended horizons. Our work follows this direction and focuses on a multi-modal memory design with explicit memory management. 

2.3 Memory management in Agents 

Effective memory management is crucial for handling long-context interactions. Existing frameworks typ-ically organize memory using hierarchical structures [18] or OS-inspired interfaces [19], often relying on explicit management strategies [20–22] to maximize efficiency. A dominant strategy among these is peri-odic summarization [23, 24], where recent history is compressed into long-term storage at fixed temporal intervals to decouple storage from reasoning. However, these methods have predominantly focused on text-based representations for LLMs [25]. With the rapid evolution of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), there is a growing necessity to incorporate multimodal information. Our approach addresses this by construct-ing a cross-modal memory that synergizes text and images, while simultaneously introducing a structured management mechanism tailored to effectively utilize this rich context for complex robotic tasks. 

## 3 Methods 

3.1 Overview 

Long-horizon manipulation relies on two contradictory capabilities: maintaining global consistency over ex-tended history and reacting responsively to immediate dynamics. End-to-end approaches typically struggle to balance these needs—short-context policies suffer from catastrophic forgetting, while heavy reasoning models incur prohibitive latency for real-time control. 4Inspect               

> recipe
> place the
> Job ’stears in
> box
> place the red
> beans in box
> place the
> Job ’stears
> into box
> place the
> mung beans
> in box
> inspect
> left box
> inspect
> middle
> box
> inspect
> right
> box
> place the
> toy duck in
> left box
> place the
> snack in
> right box

Lucy likes plush toys . Inspect the boxes, collect the 

toy duck and snack into the box. Lucy will come to visit, prepare something she likes.  

> place the
> toys on
> table
> place toy
> croissant
> in the box
> place toy
> mushroom in
> box
> place toy
> bread in
> box

The toys are dirty, and the toy bread should be next to 

the toy croissant . Please help me put the toys into the 

box so I can wash them. 

I have washed the toys, please place them in correct 

position .  

> place toy
> croissant on
> left place
> place toy
> bread on
> left place
> place toy
> mushroom on
> right place

User 

Robot 

Observation 

User 

Robot 

Observation 

User 

Robot 

Observation 

Counting 

Object 

Search 

Re arra -

ngement 

1 

> w/o memory
> w/ memory

Subtask  

> w/o memory
> w/ memory

Subtask  

> w/o memory
> w/ memory

Subtask 

2

3

David prefers mung beans to red beans . Check the recipe, 

prepare ingredients for 2 batches of multigrain congee. 

David will come, help me prepare 

additional 1 batch, but switch the beans to 

David's preference .

Text Memory 

Text Memory 

Text Memory  

> Update Memory
> Human Add Obj.

Figure 3 Tasks used in our evaluations. We report performance across 20 trials per task per method. 

To address this challenge, we propose HiMe, a Hierarchical Embodied Memory framework (Fig. 2) that de-couples embodied intelligence into three functional layers: (1) The Executor 𝜋 𝑒 : A high-frequency VLA that ensures physical stability by mapping immediate observations to actions. (2) The Sentry 𝜋 𝑠 : A lightweight VLM that identifies progress changes in the environment, triggering planning only when necessary. (3) The Planner 𝜋 𝑝 : A heavyweight VLM that uses long-term episodic memory and plans at a lower frequency. This separation amortizes the cost of complex planning over extended execution windows, ensuring the low-level controller remains responsive to immediate physical dynamics while maintaining long-term task coherence. 

Problem Setup. We formulate the long-horizon manipulation task as a sequential decision-making process under partial observability. The agent operates over a horizon 𝑇 ≫ 1, receiving high-dimensional observa-tions 𝑜 𝑡 ∈ 𝒪 and a natural language instruction 𝑙 . The objective is to generate an action sequence 𝑎 0: 𝑇 that transitions the environment to a state satisfying the instruction 𝑙 . Ideally, the optimal action at any step 𝑡 de-pends on the full interaction history ℎ𝑡 = (𝑜 0 , 𝑎 0 , . . . , 𝑜 𝑡 ) to resolve ambiguity and track progress. However, processing ℎ𝑡 continuously is computationally intractable. To address this, we adopt a hierarchical policy 

𝜋 (𝑎 𝑡 | 𝑜 0: 𝑡 , 𝑙 ).

3.2 Hierarchical Embodied Memory 

To bridge the gap between reactive control and reflective reasoning, we augment the agent with a structured state space comprising three distinct components. This explicitly represents the information required for 5immediate control, temporal monitoring, and long-term planning. 

Transient Memory ( 𝒯 𝑡 ). Managed by the Executor, it contains the instantaneous observation 𝑜 𝑡 . It serves as the minimal sufficient state for reactive sensory-motor coordination. 

Working Memory ( 𝒲 𝑡 ). To support high-frequency monitoring, we maintain a sliding window of recent observations 𝒲 𝑡 = {𝑜 𝑡 −ℎ𝑠 , . . . , 𝑜 𝑡 }. Unlike the main memory, this buffer is transient and raw, capturing the immediate dynamics required for verifying subgoal status or detecting sudden failures. 

Episodic Memory ( ℰ𝑡 ). A persistent long-term store managed by the Planner, consisting of: (1) Contex-tual Memory ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 , a multimodal key–value store ℳ𝑡 that accumulates compact, task-relevant information— including both visual imagery and textual descriptions—over time, such as object state changes, spatial con-straints, or human preferences, and supports retrieval via textual keys. (2) Procedural Memory ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 , a struc-tured plan ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 = {𝜏 𝑖 }𝑁 𝑖 =1 consisting of an ordered list of language subgoals, where the active subgoal 𝜏 (𝑖 )

> 𝑡

carries status labels like ‘active’, ‘pending’ or ‘done’ to synchronize the control loop. 

3.3 Hierarchical Policy Decomposition 

We decompose the hierarchical policy 𝜋 (𝑎 𝑡 | 𝑜 0: 𝑡 , 𝑙 ) into a three-tiered hierarchy. This design ranges from a memory-free execution layer to a long-horizon reasoning layer, progressively trading off frequency for context capacity, decoupling immediate actuation from high-level reasoning. Formally, the decision process at time 𝑡 involves interactions between a base Executor 𝜋 𝑒 , a monitoring Sentry 𝜋 𝑠 , and a reasoning Planner 

𝜋 𝑝 .

Base-level Executor ( 𝜋 𝑒 ). At the base level, the Executor functions as a high-frequency reactive policy. We assume a local Markov property where, given an active language subgoal 𝜏 𝑡 ∈ ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 , the optimal action is conditionally independent of the long-term history. The Executor maps the current observation and subgoal to an action: 

𝑎 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 𝑒 (𝑎 𝑡 | 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝜏 𝑡 ) , (1) where 𝜏 𝑡 serves as a conditioning variable abstracted from the complex episodic history, representing the current executing subgoal. This design ensures that 𝜋 𝑒 remains stateless and computationally efficient, en-abling real-time responsiveness to physical dynamics. 

Agile Sentry ( 𝜋 𝑠 ). Consistent with the architecture in Fig. 2, the Sentry acts as a gating function 𝑢 𝑡 ∈ { 0, 1}

that is used to amortize the computational cost of reasoning. Operating on the sliding window working memory 𝒲 𝑡 , the Sentry evaluates subgoal completion or environmental deviation at intervals of 𝑛 𝑚 :

𝑢 𝑡 =

{

I[𝜋 𝑠 (𝒲 𝑡 , 𝜏 𝑡 ) > 𝛿 ] , if 𝑡 ≡ 0 (mod 𝑛 𝑚 ),

0, otherwise , (2) where I[·] is the indicator function and 𝛿 is a decision threshold. 𝑢 𝑡 = 1 signals a “handover” event— indicating that the current subgoal 𝜏 𝑡 is either completed or invalidated, thereby triggering the Planner. When 𝑢 𝑡 = 0, the system bypasses high-level reasoning, maintaining the current episodic memory ℰ𝑡 +1 ← ℰ 𝑡 .

Reasoning Planner ( 𝜋 𝑝 ). When the Sentry trigger is activated ( 𝑢 𝑡 = 1), the Planner is invoked to update the episodic memory and re-align the agent’s internal belief with the current environment. Let 𝑙 denote the user instruction, 𝒲 𝑡 = {𝑜 𝑡 −ℎ𝑠 , . . . , 𝑜 𝑡 } the working memory containing recent observations, and ℰ𝑡 = (ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 , ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 

) the episodic memory maintained by the Planner, where ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 stores contextual information and ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 represents the current procedural plan. This update proceeds in two stages. (1) Context Retrieval: The Planner first encodes the instruction and recent observations into a query, and 6retrieves the most relevant contextual entries from memory: 

𝑞 𝑡 = 𝑓 enc (𝑙, 𝒲 𝑡 ) , ℳret = TopK (ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑞 𝑡 

) , (3) where ℳret ⊂ ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 denotes the retrieved subset of contextual memory. (2) Memory Update and Re-planning: Conditioned on the instruction 𝑙 , working memory 𝒲 𝑡 , retrieved context 

ℳret , and the current procedural plan ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 , the Planner jointly updates both components of episodic memory: 

(ℰ 𝑐 𝑡 +1 , ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 +1

) ← 𝜋 𝑝 

(𝑙, 𝒲 𝑡 , ℳret , ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 

) . (4) Specifically, the update to contextual memory ℰ 𝑐 is realized through three explicit operations: Add , which inserts newly observed facts or user preferences; Update , which revises outdated entries; and Delete , which removes stale or conflicting information. In parallel, the Planner synthesizes an updated procedural plan 

ℰ 𝑝 𝑡 +1, from which the next active subgoal 𝜏 𝑡 +1 is selected to continue execution. 

3.4 Implementation Details 

While our framework is model-agnostic, we instantiate the Planner with GPT-4o [26] for its strong multi-modal reasoning capabilities, and the Sentry with Qwen3-VL-8B [7] for its balance of speed and grounding accuracy. The memory backend utilizes a vector database for semantic retrieval, utilizing OpenAI’s text-embedding-3 model to encode text queries and storing multimodal memory entries alongside their caption embeddings for cosine similarity retrieval. We set the buffer size ℎ𝑠 = 8 and the monitoring interval 𝑛 𝑚 = 5.Consistent with our design philosophy, only the lightweight 𝜋 𝑒 , a fine-tuned VLA based on 𝜋 0.5, requires domain-specific training. The Sentry and Planner operate in a zero-shot or few-shot manner, leveraging pre-trained generalization to handle long-horizon logic without extensive data collection. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Task Setting 

To demonstrate the critical role of hierarchical memory in long-horizon tasks, we designed three distinct tabletop manipulation scenarios, as illustrated in Fig. 3. These tasks are specifically curated to evaluate diverse capabilities, including user interaction, preference memory, updating memory and planning with exploration. 

Object Search. We design a Domestic Maintenance task to evaluate the robot’s capability to integrate in-spection, sorting, and preference recall. In this scenario, the robot must first inspect opaque boxes to deduce storage rules and organize scattered items accordingly. Crucially, during this process, the user introduces new toys into the boxes to test the robot’s ability to dynamically update its memory. Finally, the robot faces a retrieval challenge, where it must synthesize memorized user preferences with the box contents identified during inspection to retrieve the correct object. 

Counting. In this scenario, the robot is required to interpret a visual recipe on the table and plan its subse-quent actions. The task proceeds in stages: the robot must first inspect the recipe to extract the ingredient composition and prepare the materials based on the number of servings requested by the user. Following this, the user introduces a specific preference. To fulfill this customized demand, the robot must synthesize the new constraint with the previously memorized recipe to dispense the correct personalized ingredients. 

Rearrangement. In this playroom scenario, the robot performs a two-stage “clear and restore” operation. Initially, the robot collects all toys scattered on the table into a storage box for cleaning. After a temporal interval, the robot is tasked with restoring the items to the environment. Crucially, the user’s specific place-ment preference is provided beforehand as prior knowledge. Therefore, to execute the restoration, the robot must recall this pre-established preference and synthesize it with its visual memory of the original spatial configuration to plan the final placement of each item. 7Evaluation Setup. We use a WidowX-250s arm with a parallel gripper and dual-camera visual input (third-person and wrist view). The Executor 𝜋 𝑒 runs at 2 Hz, predicting an action chunk 𝐴 𝑡 of 10 actions (10 Hz), of which 5 are executed open-loop. To monitor the subtask progress, the Sentry 𝜋 𝑠 is queried after every 10 execution steps of 𝜋 𝑒 . The Sentry will trigger Planner 𝜋 𝑝 if the current subtask is completed to invoke high-level planning. Each task’s evaluation metrics are detailed in Tab. 5. 

4.2 Main Experiment 

To thoroughly validate the effectiveness of our hierarchical memory and the monitor-based trigger mecha-nism, we keep the low-level policy 𝜋 e and the Planner backbone constant, varying only the memory context 

and the planning frequency . The comparisons are designed as follows: 

Transient Memory: A standard hierarchical VLA baseline where a memory-less Planner is invoked at fixed intervals ( 𝑛 𝑚 ) and receives only the current observation 𝑜 𝑡 . This represents the current paradigm of hierar-chical robot foundation models, such as Hi-robot [8]. 

Transient Memory w/ Sentry: This variant introduces our Sentry module to trigger the Planner based on task progress. However, the Planner remains memory-less, receiving only 𝑜 𝑡 upon being triggered. It evaluates the benefit of the more stabilized planning from the Sentry’s gating. 

Flat Memory: The Planner operates at a fixed frequency and receives the 8 most recent observations, assisted by a FIFO queue of historical keyframes it previously selected. This setting tests whether unstructured, Flat Memory is sufficient for long-horizon tasks. This setting is similar to MemER [5]. 

HiMe w/o Sentry: We utilize our complete Planner’s memory design but remove the sentry module. The Planner is forced to query the VLM at a fixed frequency regardless of subtask progress. This ablation vali-dates the sentry’s role in reducing computational redundancy and aligning planning steps with the dynamics of environments. 

HiMe (Ours): The proposed framework, where the Sentry dynamically triggers planning based on subtask progress, and the Planner utilizes the full hierarchical memory to ensure global consistency. 

Human High-level: A human oracle provides the correct subtask description at each step. This serves as an upper bound on task performance given the fixed capabilities of 𝜋 𝑒 .

4.3 Analysis of Sentry Mechanism 

We analyze the Sentry mechanism’s contribution from two key dimensions: execution consistency and obser-vation quality .           

> Table 1 Hierarchical settings used in the main experiment.
> Hierarchy Setting Trigger Planner Memory
> Transient Memory Periodic Current observation Transient Memory w/ Sentry Sentry Current observation Flat Memory Periodic Recents + FIFO HiMe w/o Sentry Periodic Recents + keyframes HiMe (Ours) Sentry Recents + keyframes Human High-level Sentry Human oracle

1) Consistency via Reduced Task Switching: Even in a Planner with transient memory setting, the Sen-try significantly boosts performance. In Fig. 4, we observe a substantial improvement ( 14% vs. 26% )when comparing Transient Memory with Transient Memory w/ Sentry . Without the Sentry, the Plan-ner operates on a frame-by-frame style, and this high-frequency re-evaluation makes the robot hy-persensitive to transient visual noise, leading to frequent, erratic switching between subtasks. The Sentry prevents the Planner from intervening until the current subtask is completed, reducing unnecessary task switching and ensuring that actions are executed coherently. It reveals that the core value of the Sentry here is enforcing temporal consistency of Planner. 

2) Quality via Uniform Sampling vs. Recent Frames: The Sentry’s ability to consolidate observations into high-quality working memory largely explains the gap between HiMe w/o Sentry and HiMe , with average task 8Object Search Counting Rearrangement Average                          

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Task  Progress  (%)
> 0
> 18 23 14
> 0
> 23
> 56 26
> 64 58
> 73 65
> 66 71 66 68
> 92 92 87 90 94 96 92 94
> Transient Memory
> Transient Memory w/ Sentry
> Flat Memory
> Hime w/o Sentry
> HiMe (ours)
> Human High-level Figure 4 Main Results. We compare HiMe against Transient, Sentry, and Flat Memory baselines across three long-horizon tasks. HiMe significantly outperforms all baselines, achieving a 90% average success rate. Notably, our method effectively bridges the gap between robot and the Human High-level oracle.

progress rising from 68% to 90% . Whereas standard Planners rely on a narrow window of recent frames, Sentry aggregates the history of the active subtask into structured working memory. This provides a global perspective for success verification, and the consolidated memory allows the Planner to verify the entire progression, effectively reducing hallucinations and redundant replanning. 

4.4 Analysis of Planner Memory Management 

We validate the necessity of our hierarchical design by comparing HiMe against memory-free baselines and flat contextual memory approaches. 

(1) The Necessity of Memory: Long-horizon tasks require persistent state tracking. In Counting , even with Sentry stabilization ( Transient Memory w/ Sentry ), the robot still fails ( 23% ) due to the lack of persistence: without an explicit memory management, it cannot retain states (e.g., counted objects) once they leave the transient observable state. 

(2) Consolidation vs. FIFO Queues: A critical insight from Fig. 4 is the inefficiency of Flat Memory , which func-tions as a contextual memory based on FIFO queues. Although it stores history, it achieves a significantly lower task progress ( 65% ) compared to HiMe (90% ). The fundamental limitation of such contextual memory is the lack of consolidation: a simple FIFO queue cannot distinguish between truly critical frames and redun-dant observations. In long-horizon tasks, the limited context window is quickly flooded with noisy frames, causing earlier critical information to be discarded. HiMe addresses this by actively consolidating memory at the subtask level. This ensures that essential high-level information is preserved regardless of the episode length, enabling high-precision retrieval with minimal Planner overhead. 

## 5 Further Analysis 

5.1 Q1: What Type of Memory Representation is Most Effective for Robotic Tasks? 

We investigate the impact of memory modality by comparing purely text memory ( Only text ), purely visual memory ( Only image ), and our cross-modal approach in Fig. 5. 

1) Spatial and Recognition Demands in Robotics: Our study results show that robotics tasks impose strong spatial localization and fine-grained recognition demands that caption only memory is inadequate for dynamical physical interactions. Text is a lossy compression: if perception initially misses an object or its spatial context, discarding raw visuals prevents visual re-grounding to recover details or correct errors. In Object Search ,

Only image (86% ) substantially outperforms Only text (74% ), which shows that memory with visual evidence 9Object Search Counting Rearrangement Average       

> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Task  Progress  (%)
> 86
> 78 76
> 80
> 74
> 91
> 84
> 83
> 92 92
> 87
> 90
> Only image Only text Ours

Figure 5 Ablation of Modality. HiMe consistently outperforms both text-only and image-only baselines across all three tasks, verifying the robustness of our cross-modal memory mechanism. 

Table 2 Comparison of different methods. We report API calls, memory hit, and average scores across three tasks. Here, API Calls refers to the average Planner requests per subtask, and Memory Hit measures the presence of required information in memory during memory-dependent subtask.                              

> Method Components Object Search Counting Rearrangement Sentry Memory Management Memory Size API Call ( ↓)Memory Hit ( ↑)Avg. Progress ( ↑)API Call ( ↓)Memory Hit ( ↑)Avg. Progress ( ↑)API Call ( ↓)Memory Hit ( ↑)Avg. Progress ( ↑)
> HiMe (Ours) ✓✓𝑖𝑛 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒 1.8 94% 92% 2.6 98% 92% 1.4 92% 87%
> Flat Memory ××𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 85.4 68% 64% 4.8 61% 58% 6.2 76% 73%

is significantly stronger. 

2) Text for Semantics and Logic: Conversely, text memory is indispensable for non-spatial reasoning. It ef-ficiently summarizes semantics, captures logical dependencies like task sequencing, and retains user pref-erences. In tasks requiring semantic reasoning, such as Counting , Only text (91% ) outperforms Only image 

(78% ), since these semantic clues are hard to extract from pixels on demand. 

3) Superiority of Interleaved Memory: Our cross-modal approach achieves the best performance (Average 90% )by combining the spatial/recognitional fidelity of images with the semantic and logical structure of text, enabling our hierarchical memory system to perform both precise grounding and effective reasoning. 

5.2 Q2: Is Dynamic Memory Management Necessary? 

To assess the need for dynamic memory management, we run an ablation against two baselines: (1) No Management , which only supports Add /Retrieve and keeps all observations as an append-only buffer; and (2) FIFO , which caps memory at 8 entries and evicts the oldest when full. 

1) The Cost of Forgetting: In Fig. 6, FIFO performs worst ( 68% average), far below No Management (86% ). This shows that for long-horizon tasks, early context is critical : naive eviction can remove essential information (e.g., an object location observed early) needed for later reasoning. 

2) The Value of Consistency: While No Management achieves decent performance by retaining all history, it is still inferior to our full method ( 86% vs. 90% ). Although No Management retains all history, it remains below our full method ( 86% vs. 90% ) due to redundancy and inconsistency . Without Update /Delete , memory stores obsolete states (e.g., prior object locations) alongside current ones, introducing noise during Query 

and potentially confusing the Planner. 

3) Necessity of Active Management: Our method performs best by actively curating memory: Update refreshes outdated entries to maintain consistency, and Delete removes redundancy. Thus, storing more data is insuf-ficient; effective robots must maintain a concise, consistent memory. 10 Object Search Counting Rearrangement Average      

> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Task  Progress  (%)
> 67
> 73
> 64
> 68
> 90 89
> 80
> 86 92 92
> 87
> 90
> FIFO No management Ours

Figure 6 Ablation of Management. Comparison between FIFO, No management, and our approach. HiMe consistently achieves the highest task progress across all three tasks, proving the effectiveness of our memory retrieval and consoli-dation mechanism in long-horizon tasks. 

5.3 Q3: Why Does HiMe Achieve Lower Latency and Fewer API Calls? 

We further analyze efficiency and reliability by recording total Planner invocations (average API Calls per subtask) and the Memory Hit rate (whether required historical context is available at query time). Beyond the gains in Sec. 4.3 and Sec. 4.4, Tab. 2 shows a clear efficiency advantage: HiMe reduces API calls by 

∼ 3× (e.g., 5.4 to 1.8 in Object Search) over Flat Memory. Since VLM inference dominates latency, fewer calls directly yield faster execution. This efficiency stems from two structural advantages over the Flat memory: 

1) Sentry Reduces Invocation Frequency: In Flat memory methods, the Planner is often queried every step to interpret the visual buffer, placing the expensive LLM in a high-frequency control loop. Instead, after the Planner specifies a subtask, the Sentry handles dense completion checking and wakes the Planner only when necessary. Thus, Planner involvement shifts from step-by-step to sparse subtask-level calls. 1 4 8  

> Number of Frames
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Percentage  (%)
> Precision
> Recall

Figure 7 Increasing the number of recent frames provided to the Sentry leads to a con-sistent improvement in both precision and re-call. This indicates that a longer temporal con-text is beneficial for accurate subtask monitor-ing. 

2) Infinite Memory vs. FIFO Forgetting: Flat Memory uses a FIFO buffer (Tab. 1), forming a sliding window that forgets early ob-servations. The resulting low memory hit rate ( 68% vs. 94% )forces redundant exploration when needed context has been evicted. In contrast, HiMe maintains an infinite structured memory, avoiding this forgetting and enabling immediate re-trieval without physical re-exploration. 

5.4 Q4: What Affects Sentry’s Termination Behavior? 

To understand the Sentry’s decision-making boundary, we an-alyzed its performance on subtask completion detection under different working memory sizes (window length 𝑁 ). Fig. 7 presents the Precision and Recall, where Subtask “Done” is treated as the positive class. 

1) Benefits of Temporal Context: As shown in the Fig. 7, increasing the context window from 1 to 8 frames improves both Precision (from ∼ 76% to ∼ 82% ) and Recall (from ∼ 22% to ∼ 35% ). A single frame often lacks sufficient information to distinguish between a temporary pause and true completion. By observing a sequence of 8 frames (consistent with our sentry‘s working memory), the Sentry can leverage temporal cues to make more reliable judgments. 

2) The ”Conservative” Nature of Sentry: The significant gap between high Precision and low Recall reveals 11 the Sentry’s inherent “conservative” nature. The system exhibits a strong bias towards the incomplete state, preferring to continue execution unless overwhelmingly confident that the goal is met. While this minimizes premature stops (high Precision), the low Recall creates a “missing signal” problem where the agent might overshoot its target or enter infinite loops. Since the Sentry is prone to False Negatives (missing the “Done” event), we design a fixed-interval Planner fallback. It ensures that execution loops are eventually broken even when the Sentry fails to trigger. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we presented HiMe, a novel hierarchical embodied memory framework that resolves the fun-damental frequency-competence paradox in long-horizon Vision-Language-Action control. By decoupling embodied intelligence into a high-frequency Executor, a progress-aware Sentry, and a strategic Planner, we mirror the multi-store structure of human cognition to balance real-time responsiveness with deep reason-ing. Our introduction of cross-modal semantic schemata and active management mechanisms (Add, Update, Delete) transforms robotic memory from a passive observation buffer into a dynamic, self-evolving knowl-edge system. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HiMe achieves 90% average success rate—effectively bridging the gap to human-level performance. We believe that this shift from flat, transient policies to hierar-chical, structured memory is a vital step toward developing truly autonomous and adaptive robotic agents. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62521004). We thank the incredible SII MakerClub for their generous supply of essential materials and invaluable technical assistance throughout this project. We are also deeply grateful to Chunbiao Feng and Hongbo Tang for their pivotal technical support in hardware setup and control implementation. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work where the goal is to advance the fields of machine learning and robotics. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## Limitations 

The paper has several limitations that suggest directions for future work. Our evaluation is primarily con-ducted on real-robot tasks without a matched standard simulation benchmark. While this setting better captures memory-intensive long-horizon behavior under real-world dynamics, it limits controlled compari-son and benchmark-level reproducibility. In addition, the current tasks mainly rely on relatively simple ma-nipulation primitives such as pick-and-place, and broader validation on more diverse and dexterous skills remains necessary. Although we provide additional analysis on memory scaling and open-source Planner substitution, the current study does not yet fully characterize performance under very long horizons, larger environments, or extended deployment over time. 12 References 

[1] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Paul Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. CoRR, abs/2406.09246, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2406.09246. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406. 09246 .[2] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilin-sky. 𝜋 0.5 : a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. CoRR, abs/2504.16054, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2504.16054. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.16054 .[3] Marcel Torne, Andy Tang, Yuejiang Liu, and Chelsea Finn. Learning long-context diffusion policies via past-token prediction. CoRR, abs/2505.09561, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2505.09561. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv. 2505.09561 .[4] Haoquan Fang, Markus Grotz, Wilbert Pumacay, Yi Ru Wang, Dieter Fox, Ranjay Krishna, and Jiafei Duan. Sam2act: Integrating visual foundation model with A memory architecture for robotic manipulation. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors, Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19, 2025, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v267/fang25c.html .[5] Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea Finn. Scaling up memory for robotic control via experience retrieval. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=1dH4ARGdwD .[6] Siyin Wang, Jinlan Fu, Feihong Liu, Xinzhe He, Huangxuan Wu, Junhao Shi, Kexin Huang, Zhaoye Fei, Jingjing Gong, Zuxuan Wu, et al. Roboomni: Proactive robot manipulation in omni-modal context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23763, 2025. [7] Qwen Team. Qwen3-vl technical report. CoRR, abs/2511.21631, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2511.21631. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.21631 .[8] Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Brian Ichter, Michael Robert Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James Tanner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy Groom, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hierarchical vision-language-action models. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors, Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19, 2025, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://proceedings. mlr.press/v267/shi25d.html .[9] Yi Li, Yuquan Deng, Jesse Zhang, Joel Jang, Marius Memmel, Caelan Reed Garrett, Fabio Ramos, Dieter Fox, Anqi Li, Abhishek Gupta, and Ankit Goyal. HAMSTER: hierarchical action models for open-world robot manipulation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=h7aQxzKbq6 .[10] Yide Shentu, Philipp Wu, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Pieter Abbeel. From llms to actions: Latent codes as bridges in hierarchical robot control. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2024, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, October 14-18, 2024, pages 8539–8546. IEEE, 2024. doi: 10.1109/IROS58592.2024. 10801683. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10801683 .[11] Runhao Li, Wenkai Guo, Zhenyu Wu, Changyuan Wang, Haoyuan Deng, Zhenyu Weng, Yap-Peng Tan, and Zi-wei Wang. MAP-VLA: memory-augmented prompting for vision-language-action model in robotic manipulation. CoRR, abs/2511.09516, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2511.09516. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.09516 .

13 [12] Yi Zhu, Fengda Zhu, Zhaohuan Zhan, Bingqian Lin, Jianbin Jiao, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. Vision-dialog navigation by exploring cross-modal memory. CoRR, abs/2003.06745, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2003.06745 .[13] Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong Liu, Tiancai Wang, Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan, Xiangyu Zhang, and Gao Huang. MemoryVLA: Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-action models for robotic manip-ulation. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=54U3XHf7qq .[14] Ruĳie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Shuaiyi Huang, Jianfeng Gao, Hal Daumé III, Andrey Kolobov, Furong Huang, and Jianwei Yang. Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=b1CVu9l5GO .[15] Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Anji Liu, Yonggang Jin, Jinbing Hou, Bowei Zhang, Haowei Lin, Zhaofeng He, Zilong Zheng, Yaodong Yang, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. JARVIS-1: open-world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. CoRR, abs/2311.05997, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.05997. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2311.05997 .[16] Zaĳing Li, Yuquan Xie, Rui Shao, Gongwei Chen, Dongmei Jiang, and Liqiang Nie. Optimus-1: Hybrid multi-modal memory empowered agents excel in long-horizon tasks. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XXOMCwZ6by .[17] Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with LLMs enables open-world multi-task agents. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=KtvPdGb31Z .[18] Junming Liu, Yifei Sun, Weihua Cheng, Haodong Lei, Yirong Chen, Licheng Wen, Xuemeng Yang, Daocheng Fu, Pinlong Cai, Nianchen Deng, Yi Yu, Shuyue Hu, Botian Shi, and Ding Wang. Memverse: Multimodal memory for lifelong learning agents. CoRR, abs/2512.03627, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2512.03627. URL https://doi.org/10. 48550/arXiv.2512.03627 .[19] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. CoRR, abs/2310.08560, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2310.08560. URL https://doi.org/ 10.48550/arXiv.2310.08560 .[20] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025. [21] Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. A-mem: Agentic memory for LLM agents. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2026. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=FiM0M8gcct .[22] Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Hinrich Schütze, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. Memory-r1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2508.19828, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2508.19828. URL https://doi.org/ 10.48550/arXiv.2508.19828 .[23] Lin Long, Yichen He, Wentao Ye, Yiyuan Pan, Yuan Lin, Hang Li, Junbo Zhao, and Wei Li. Seeing, listening, remem-bering, and reasoning: A multimodal agent with long-term memory. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=PMz29A7Muq .[24] Woongyeong Yeo, Kangsan Kim, Jaehong Yoon, and Sung Ju Hwang. Worldmm: Dynamic multimodal memory agent for long video reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 25599–25609, June 2026. [25] Bing Wang, Xinnian Liang, Jian Yang, Hui Huang, Zhenhe Wu, Shuangzhi Wu, Zejun Ma, and Zhoujun Li. SCM: enhancing large language model with self-controlled memory framework. In Feida Zhu, Philip S. Yu, Akiyo Nadamoto, Ee-Peng Lim, Kyuseok Shim, Wei Ding, and Bingxue Zhang, editors, Database Systems for Advanced Applications - 30th International Conference, DASFAA 2025, Singapore, Singapore, May 26-29, 2025, Proceedings, Part VI, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 188–203. Springer, 2025. doi: 10.1007/978-981-95-4158-4\_12. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-95-4158-4_12 .

14 [26] OpenAI. Gpt-4o system card. CoRR, abs/2410.21276, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2410.21276. URL https://doi. org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.21276 .[27] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Kirsty Ellis, Peter David Fagan, Joey Hejna, Masha Itkina, Marion Lepert, Yecheng Jason Ma, Patrick Tree Miller, Jimmy Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Shivin Dass, Huy Ha, Arhan Jain, Abraham Lee, Youngwoon Lee, Marius Memmel, Sungjae Park, Ilĳa Radosavovic, Kaiyuan Wang, Albert Zhan, Kevin Black, Cheng Chi, Kyle Beltran Hatch, Shan Lin, Jingpei Lu, Jean Mercat, Abdul Rehman, Pannag R Sanketi, Archit Sharma, Cody Simpson, Quan Vuong, Homer Rich Walke, Blake Wulfe, Ted Xiao, Jonathan Heewon Yang, Arefeh Yavary, Tony Z. Zhao, Christopher Agia, Rohan Baĳal, Mateo Guaman Cas-tro, Daphne Chen, Qiuyu Chen, Trinity Chung, Jaimyn Drake, Ethan Paul Foster, Jensen Gao, David Antonio Her-rera, Minho Heo, Kyle Hsu, Jiaheng Hu, Donovon Jackson, Charlotte Le, Yunshuang Li, Xinyu Lin, Zehan Ma, Abhiram Maddukuri, Suvir Mirchandani, Daniel Morton, Tony Khuong Nguyen, Abigail O’Neill, Rosario Scalise, Derick Seale, Victor Son, Stephen Tian, Emi Tran, Andrew E. Wang, Yilin Wu, Annie Xie, Jingyun Yang, Patrick Yin, Yunchu Zhang, Osbert Bastani, Glen Berseth, Jeannette Bohg, Ken Goldberg, Abhinav Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, Di-nesh Jayaraman, Joseph J Lim, Jitendra Malik, Roberto Martín-Martín, Subramanian Ramamoorthy, Dorsa Sadigh, Shuran Song, Jiajun Wu, Michael C. Yip, Yuke Zhu, Thomas Kollar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. DROID: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. In RSS 2024 Workshop: Data Generation for Robotics, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ml2pTYLNLi .

15 Appendix 

## A Task Design and Metrics 

Our real-robot evaluation consists of three types of structured tasks: Object Search , Counting , and Re-arrangement . These tasks are designed to cover the aspects of long-horizon embodied decision-making, including inspection-based memory acquisition, persistent state tracking, dynamic memory revision, and preference-aware planning. 

Tasks. Table 3 summarizes the task settings and their corresponding memory challenges.                                         

> Table 3 Real-robot tasks in our evaluation.
> Task Setting Core Memory Challenge Object Search Three boxes with unseen internal con-tents and visible objects on the table. The robot must actively inspect the boxes to infer their contents and then place visible objects accordingly. Dur-ing execution, the environment may change, requiring memory revision. Memory formation under partial observability through active in-spection , together with continuous memory updates in changing envi-ronments.
> Counting Multiple ingredient plates and arecipe specifying required propor-tions. The agent must first read the recipe and then repeatedly pick ingredients across multiple steps. Persistent semantic memory and
> cumulative progress tracking over long horizons.
> Rearrangement Multiple objects and a container. The agent must first collect all objects while remembering their original lo-cations, and later restore them to their original positions. Long-horizon memory retention and consistency over extended execution.

Although these tasks share the same hierarchical control framework, they stress different forms of memory usage. Object Search emphasizes active perception and belief updating under partial observability, since the robot cannot determine box contents without inspection and must revise memory when the environment changes. Counting focuses on persistent semantic memory and progress monitoring, as the robot must retain the recipe requirements and keep track of cumulative ingredient collection across repeated action cycles. Rearrangement requires longer-term spatial memory, because the robot must remember the original object layout during collection and later use this stored information to restore the scene. Across all task families, we additionally introduce user preference constraints , such as preferred objects, disliked ingredients, or placement rules. These constraints require the agent not only to store environment states, but also to maintain and use user-specific information during planning and execution. As a result, the system must integrate memory with high-level reasoning and dynamically adjust its plan when new observations or updated preferences become relevant. 

Action steps. To further characterize the difficulty of these real-robot tasks, we report the number of subtasks and the approximate total number of action steps required by each task in Table 4. These statistics reflect that all three tasks require multi-stage execution over extended horizons, rather than single-step or short reactive behaviors. 16 Table 4 Action steps across 3 tasks.         

> Task Number of Subtasks Total Action Steps
> Object Search 6∼1450 Counting 7∼1200 Rearrangement 6∼1035

Evaluation. Each task is evaluated over 20 trials per method . We measure performance using the metrics summarized in Table 5. These metrics are designed to capture three complementary aspects of system per-formance. Task Progress measures execution quality at the task level, indicating whether the agent can successfully complete the required long-horizon objectives. API Calls measures reasoning frequency and therefore serves as a proxy for computational cost and system efficiency. Memory Hit Rate directly evalu-ates whether the maintained memory contains the information needed for effective replanning and decision-making when the Planner is invoked. Together, these metrics provide a joint assessment of task completion quality, computational efficiency, and memory effectiveness.       

> Table 5 Evaluation metrics.
> Metric Description Task Progress Each task is decomposed into multiple subtasks. Task Progress measures the proportion of completed subtasks, reflecting the over-all task completion level.
> API Calls The average number of Planner invocations per subtask, reflecting reasoning frequency and computational cost.
> Memory Hit Rate Whether the required information is present in memory when the Planner is invoked, reported as the probability of successful mem-ory retrieval.

## B Model Initialization, Training, and Deployment 

We provide the initialization, training, and deployment details of the three-layer HiMe system, including the low-level Executor, the high-level Planner, and the Sentry module. 

Model setup. HiMe consists of three components: a low-level Executor for action generation, a high-level Planner for memory update and subtask decomposition, and a Sentry for execution monitoring and replan-ning trigger prediction. The overall model setup is summarized in Table 6.  

> Table 6 Model initialization and deployment setup of HiMe.

Module Model Role 

Planner GPT-4o / Qwen3-VL-30B Memory update and replanning Sentry Qwen3-VL-8B Execution monitoring and trigger prediction Executor 𝜋 0.5 Low-level action generation The Executor is initialized from the public 𝜋 0.5 checkpoint trained on the DROID dataset [27], and is further fine-tuned on our task-specific real-robot demonstrations. The Planner is instantiated with GPT-4o in the main experiments. To improve reproducibility, we additionally replace the Planner with an open-source VLM, Qwen3-VL-30B, in supplementary experiments under the same evaluation protocol. The Sentry is implemented with Qwen3-VL-8B and deployed locally for online monitoring during execution. 17 Robot observations and control interface. The Executor takes as input two RGB observations, including a third-person view and a wrist camera view, together with the robot state consisting of the end-effector pose and gripper state. It predicts low-level action chunks for control. In our implementation, the Executor predicts 10 actions at a time, corresponding to an action horizon of 10. The robot platform is a WidowX-250 manipulator with a parallel gripper. The overall control loop runs at 10 Hz. 

Low-level policy training. The Executor is fine-tuned on task-specific real-robot demonstrations collected on the WidowX-250 platform. Our training set contains 60 demonstrations in total, including 50 standard demonstrations and 10 additional corner-case demonstrations. We follow the standard OpenPI training recipe. The main hyperparameters are listed in Table 7.  

> Table 7 Hyperparameters for low-level Executor ( 𝜋 0.5) fine-tuning.

Hyperparameter Value 

Optimizer AdamW 

𝛽 1 0.9 

𝛽 2 0.999 Weight Decay 0.1 Gradient Clip Norm 1.0 LR Schedule Cosine decay Warmup Steps 10k Peak Learning Rate 5 × 10 −5

Batch Size 256 EMA Decay 0.999 Training Steps 30k Action Horizon 10 Demonstrations 60 (50 regular + 10 corner cases) 

Planner and Sentry deployment. The Planner is invoked only when replanning is required, rather than at ev-ery control step. In the main experiments, the Planner is instantiated with GPT-4o through the OpenAI API. For local deployment experiments, we serve Qwen3-VL models with vLLM through an OpenAI-compatible API interface. The detailed deployment configuration is summarized in Table 8.  

> Table 8 Deployment configuration for locally served VLM modules. Unless otherwise specified, all other settings use default vLLM configurations.

Module Model GPU Setup Temperature Max Model Len 

Sentry Qwen3-VL-8B 1× H100 (80GB) 0.6 8192 Planner (supp.) Qwen3-VL-30B 2× H100 (80GB) 0.6 16384 

Inference setup. Both local models are served with vLLM using an OpenAI-compatible endpoint and inte-grated into the online real-robot system through standard API-based invocation. 

Real-robot setup. All task-specific demonstrations are collected on a real WidowX-250 platform under a fixed tabletop setup, as shown in Figure 8. The setup includes a front-facing Intel RealSense D435 camera for third-person observation, a wrist-mounted camera for close-range manipulation feedback, a set of task objects placed in the shared workspace, and multiple containers used for long-horizon manipulation tasks. Demon-strations are collected through leader-follower teleoperation, and all robot control and sensor streams are integrated through ROS. 18 Intel Realsense D435 Camera 

# WidowX Robot 

# Experiment Objects Figure 8 Real-world experimental setup. The system consists of a WidowX-250 robot arm, a front-facing Intel RealSense D435 camera, and a tabletop workspace containing task objects and storage boxes. 

During data collection, both the external camera and the wrist camera record RGB observations at 25 Hz. Each trajectory is synchronized with robot proprioceptive states, including end-effector pose, joint states, and gripper state. After collection, raw trajectories are processed through a standardized preprocessing pipeline. All images are resized to 224 × 224 , and the trajectories are temporally subsampled to 10 Hz. The processed demonstrations are then converted into the LeRobot format for downstream training. 

## C Additional Experiments 

We provide additional experiments to further analyze controlled memory management, Planner generaliza-tion with open-source VLMs, memory scalability over extended horizons, and system latency. 

C.1 Controlled Memory Ablation 

We first conduct a controlled memory ablation on the Rearrangement task to separate the effect of memory management strategy from that of memory capacity. In the main setting, HiMe uses unconstrained active memory, while the FIFO baseline is evaluated with a fixed memory budget. Although the FIFO budget is chosen to match the average memory size of the unlimited active baseline, the two settings still differ in whether memory is explicitly constrained. To provide a cleaner comparison, we additionally evaluate a limited-memory version of active management under the same fixed budget. 19 Specifically, we compare three variants: Unlimited Active Management , corresponding to the original HiMe setting with unconstrained memory; Limited Active Management , which uses the same Add / Update / Delete mechanism under a fixed budget of 8 entries; and FIFO (Limited) , which uses the same budget with FIFO eviction. 

Table 9 Controlled memory in Rearrangement. 

Method Memory Budget Task Progress (%) 

Unlimited Active Management Unbounded 87.0 Limited Active Management Fixed (8 entries) 80.0 FIFO (Limited) Fixed (8 entries) 64.0 Performance decreases under constrained memory, but active management remains substantially stronger than FIFO under the same capacity. This result indicates that the benefit of HiMe is not explained by larger memory alone, and that explicit Update / Delete operations remain useful beyond simple eviction. 

C.2 Open-Source Planner Evaluation 

To improve reproducibility and examine Planner generalization, we replace the main Planner with the open-source VLM Qwen3-VL-30B and evaluate the system on the Rearrangement task under the same protocol. The results are shown in Fig. 9. Fig. 9(a) reports the main comparison with the corresponding baselines. Fig. 9(b) presents the modality ablation, comparing the full system with text-only and image-only memory. Fig. 9(c) shows the memory ablation under the same open-source Planner. Overall, the trends are consistent with the main experiments: HiMe remains the best-performing variant with Qwen3-VL-30B, indicating that the benefits of structured memory and sentry-based coordination are robust to the choice of Planner. 0                       

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Task  Progress  (%)
> (a) Main Comparison
> HiMe (Ours)
> HiMe w/o Sentry
> Flat Memory
> Transient Memory
> Transient Memory w/ Sentry
> 25.0 25.0
> 48.3 48.3
> 83.3
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> (b) Modality Ablation
> HiMe (Ours)
> Only text
> Only image
> 58.3 65.0
> 83.3
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> (c) Memory Ablation
> HiMe (Ours)
> No Management
> FIFO
> 70.0 63.3
> 83.3

Figure 9 Additional experiments on the Rearrangement task with Qwen3-VL-30B as the Planner. (a) Main comparison with the corresponding baselines. (b) Modality ablation. (c) Memory ablation. The overall trends are consistent with the main experiments, and HiMe remains the best-performing variant under the open-source Planner. 

C.3 Memory Scalability 

We further analyze memory scalability using an extended multi-round version of Object Search . In each round, the robot must inspect boxes with initially unknown contents and place the visible table object accord-ingly. At the beginning of each new round, the box contents are changed, requiring the agent to re-inspect the scene and revise memory before acting. As the number of rounds increases, both the task horizon and the number of subtasks increase. We report the average Memory Size and Task Progress across different numbers of rounds. 20 Table 10 Memory scalability in extended multi-round Object Search. 

Rounds Subtasks Memory Size Task Progress (%) 

1 4 5.5 92.5 2 8 9.9 76.3 3 12 14.0 66.7 As the horizon increases, memory size grows while task performance declines. This result suggests that the main challenge in long-horizon settings is not only storing more information, but also maintaining correct and up-to-date memory as the environment evolves. 

C.4 System Latency 

We additionally measure Planner latency under different deployments. Each Planner call consists of two stages: memory query / retrieval, and plan generation together with memory update. We report end-to-end latency over complete Planner calls.  

> Table 11 End-to-end Planner latency under different model deployments.

Model P50 (s) P90 (s) P99 (s) Avg. Completion Tokens 

GPT-4o (API) 38.59 49.30 57.28 517.9 Qwen3-VL-30B (local) 6.83 7.93 8.65 532.8 Qwen3-VL-8B (local) 6.10 7.08 11.34 399.0 Latency differences are mainly associated with deployment mode, i.e., remote API versus local serving, rather than token scale alone. In practice, HiMe is compatible with different Planner backends, and local deployment substantially reduces reasoning latency. Since Planner calls are triggered only when necessary, this reasoning latency remains decoupled from the high-frequency low-level control loop. 21 D Prompts Details 

Sentry Prompt 

You are the EXECUTION OBSERVER of an embodied agent. 

Primary input modality: 

• Plan list: – The model’s current decomposition of the task into subtasks. 

– Each subtask line includes its execution status (e.g., [done], [current], [pending]). • Combined images of recent frames: – CRITICAL LAYOUT INFO: Each image is a composite. 

– LEFT HALF: Wrist Camera View (Close-up, attached to the gripper). 

– RIGHT HALF: Third-Person View (Global view of the robot and environment). Your ONLY job is to judge whether the CURRENT subtask has been completed. 

Judgment Criteria: 

• Inspect: done when the robot arm is above or extended into the box, and the wrist view shows the content and the black background of the box. • Pick & Place: done when the object has been successfully released at the destination or you observe that the robot arm is above a box and see its black background. • Reset: done when the robot arm is in the home pose. 

– The robot arm home pose is: in both images, the arm is aligned parallel to what appears to be a rail or track. The end effector (or gripper) is open and facing downwards towards the table. • The interior bottom surface of the box is lined with a black background to enhance contrast for detection. 

# REQUIRED OUTPUT FORMAT 

You MUST output exactly this XML structure: 

<status> <!-- EXACTLY one of: done not_done --> </status> 

Planner Prompt 

You are the PLANNER of an embodied agent. 

Primary input modalities: 

• User instruction: The user’s high-level instruction for the agent. • Plan list: The model’s current decomposition of the task into subtasks. Each subtask line includes its execution status (e.g., [done], [current], [pending]). • Combined images during subtask execution: – IMAGE LAYOUT & USAGE GUIDE: – LEFT HALF (Wrist View): Egocentric view attached to the gripper. Usage: Identify specific objects, read text, verify grasping. 

– RIGHT HALF (Third-Person View): Global view. Usage: Spatial context, locating containers, tracking arm position. 

– NOTE: Integrate information from both. Use Right view to navigate, Left view to inspect. You have access to an external MEMORY module through a structured CRUD interface. MEMORY stores records with fields: id , tags , data (type, value), image_path .

22 # TAG DESIGN PRINCIPLES 

Tags are the PRIMARY mechanism for memory retrieval. 1. OBJECT TAGS: toy_duck , snack_package , left_box .2. LOCATION TAGS: table , shelf , inside_left_box .3. USER_PREFERENCE TAGS: user , lily , likes , prefers .

Tag Usage Rules: Use 2-5 tags per record. Update tags when object state changes. Tag Query Strat-egy: PREFER tag-based queries. Query one tag every time. 

# MEMORY CRUD PROTOCOL 

You interact with memory only via structured XML operations. 

(1) QUERY (READ) 

<operation> <type>QUERY</type> <query>search key tags</query> <reason>why you search this</reason> </operation> 

(2) CREATE 

<operation> <type>CREATE</type> <tags>...</tags> <text>concise description or fact</text> <image_path>index</image_path> <reason>why this new memory is necessary</reason> </operation> 

(3) UPDATE 

<operation> <type>UPDATE</type> <id>record_id</id> <tags>...</tags> <text>updated description</text> <image_path>2</image_path> <reason>why this existing record must be changed</reason> </operation> 

(4) DELETE 

<operation> <type>DELETE</type> <id>...</id> <reason>why this record is no longer useful</reason> </operation> 

# EVIDENCE RELIABILITY RULES (NO ASSUMPTIONS) 

• Memory must contain only verifiable facts derived from explicit user instructions or direct visual evidence. • Do NOT CREATE FAKE memory. Prefer planning an inspection step. • UPDATE is for correcting/refining without changing time meaning. • When state changes, CREATE a new record, UPDATE the old one to label as past. • DELETE sparingly (only for duplicates or errors). 

# MEMORY USAGE POLICY (TWO-TURN INTERACTION) 

• Turn 1 (QUERY-only): Issue QUERY operations. NO Create/Update/Delete. Plan list must be 

23 empty. • Turn 2 (REFINE + CRUD): Issue Create/Update/Delete based on query results. Output finalized 

<plan_list> .

# PLAN LIST FORMAT (FINAL OUTPUT ONLY, TURN 2) Plain text, one subtask per line. • [done] : subtask completed. • [current] : the single subtask to execute NEXT. • [pending] : future subtasks. Annotation: You MAY include a short purpose in parentheses, e.g., [pending] inspect recipe (check what does it need) .

# PLAN LIST ACTION FORMAT 

1. Inspection action: Main verb ”inspect”. Use when information is missing. 2. Pick-and-place action: ”pick up <object> <source> and place it to <target> ”. 

# REQUIRED OUTPUT FORMAT FOR EACH TURN 

<summary> <!-- Concise reasoning summarizing observations and memory interaction --> </summary> <memory_operations> <!-- Turn 1: QUERY only. Turn 2: CRUD operations. --> </memory_operations> <plan_list> <!-- Turn 1: EMPTY. Turn 2: Finalized plan list. [done] ... [current] ... [pending] ... --> </plan_list> 

24