Title: Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.30940v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Jul 2026 00:16:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

Lukas Lao Beyer 1 Sertac Karaman 1

## Abstract 

Deep learning methods have vastly expanded the capabilities of motion planning in robotics ap-plications, as learning priors from large-scale data has been shown to be essential in capturing the highly complex behavior required for solv-ing tasks such as manipulation or navigation for autonomous vehicles. At the same time, model-based planning algorithms based on search or op-timization remain an essential tool due to their flexibility, efficiency, and the ability to incorpo-rate domain knowledge via expert-designed al-gorithms and objective functions. We propose a new generative framework to unify these two paradigms. First, we learn an autoencoder with a high compression ratio and a latent space of hier-archically ordered, discrete-valued tokens. Lever-aging both the dimensionality reduction and the hierarchical coarse-to-fine structure learned by this autoencoder, we then perform motion plan-ning by directly searching in the latent space of to-kens. This search can optimize arbitrary objective functions specified at test time, providing a large degree of flexibility while maintaining efficiency and producing realistic solutions by relying on the generative capabilities of the highly compressed autoencoder. We evaluate our method on nuPlan and the Waymo Open Motion Dataset, showing how latent space search can be used for a variety of guided behavior generation tasks, achieving strong performance for closed-loop motion plan-ning and multi-agent guided scenario synthesis without requiring any task-specific training. 

## 1. Introduction 

In real-world settings, robotic motion planning must pro-duce trajectories that satisfy task- and user-specific objec-

> 1

MIT LIDS. Correspondence to: Lukas Lao Beyer 

<llb@mit.edu >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). z 1 z 2

𝓔 

> Compressed representation
> Decoded trajectory
> …

(a) Environment-conditioned trajectory decoder. 

search −−−−−−−−−−−−−→…   

> …
> …
> z1
> z2
> z3

1 token 2 tokens 3 tokens candidates selection goal 

> 1
> Goal A
> Goal B

(b) Latent token search with test-time objective (no retraining). 

Figure 1. Token search for guided trajectory synthesis. We learn a highly compressed, environment-conditioned autoencoder that maps trajectories to an ordered discrete code z. At test time we perform greedy token search: at step i, we fix z1: i−1, enu-merate zi, decode each candidate trajectory, score according to the user-specified objective chosen at test time , and keep the best prefix (here we illustrate a goal-reaching objective). Because to-kens are causally ordered and learned with nested dropout, each additional token refines a feasible prefix so greedy search follows the representation’s intended coarse-to-fine semantics. Token se-mantics are not hand-designed and emerge through compression. 

tives while remaining realistic and safe in complex envi-ronments. Classical model-based planners offer flexibility through explicit cost functions and constraints, and can be highly robust and performant when deployed in controlled settings (Foehn et al., 2021; Moore et al., 2014; Goh & Gerdes, 2016). However, purely model-based approaches struggle in unstructured and open-ended domains, where realistic behavior depends on rich priors learned from data. This has driven a shift toward learning-based approaches that leverage large-scale data to acquire such priors. How-ever, many learning-based planners bake task structure into 1

> arXiv:2606.30940v1 [cs.RO] 29 Jun 2026 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces

the model via conditioning (Cheng et al., 2024), training-time reward shaping (Zhang et al., 2025), or specialized inference procedures (Dauner et al., 2023), which can make it nontrivial to accommodate new objectives or constraints. In this paper, we propose a generative framework aimed at unifying these paradigms by separating trajectory realism from test-time control. A key ingredient enabling this sepa-ration is compression. Consider mapping high-dimensional trajectories to short sequences of low-dimensional or even discrete tokens: this simultaneously (i) reduces the dimen-sionality of the decision space the planner must search over and (ii) concentrates the burden of producing realistic mo-tion in a decoder, i.e., a learned reconstruction model that expands tokens back into full trajectories. Figure 1 previews our approach, which implements this principle by learning an environment-conditioned autoencoder that maps trajecto-ries to a highly compressed, ordered latent representation; motion planning then reduces to tree search over latent to-kens guided by a user-specified test-time objective. This yields a simple interface for incorporating domain knowl-edge or preferences while relying on the decoder to produce realistic, context-appropriate behavior. From a motion-planning viewpoint, the environment-conditioned, ordered tokenization induces a context-dependent library of maneuvers. Unlike classical maneuver libraries with a small fixed set of hand-engineered prim-itives (Frazzoli et al., 2005; Pivtoraiko et al., 2009), the library here is learned from data and automatically adapts to the scene through environment conditioning. Furthermore, the hierarchical ordering of this library enables efficient traversal of a combinatorially large set of maneuvers via coarse-to-fine refinement. From the point of view of guided generation, our method chooses a different route than the iterative gradient-based guidance commonly used with diffusion and flow models, offering unique advantages. For example, partial token pre-fixes decode to trajectories in the original state space, so the objective can be applied directly without requiring addi-tional estimators. Furthermore, latent token search naturally supports objectives that are not smooth or differentiable. We evaluate our approach on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (Ettinger et al., 2021) and nuPlan (Caesar et al., 2021), using autonomous driving as a demanding testbed for guided generation with diverse objectives. Overall, our results indicate that a highly compressed, ordered latent rep-resentation can turn guided generation into a direct search problem. Throughout our experiments, we find that greedy search in the learned token space provides a simple yet effec-tive mechanism for test-time control, supporting a variety of objectives, yielding strong performance on closed-loop plan-ning, and achieving high realism metrics on guided multi-agent scenario synthesis, all without task-specific training. 

## 2. Related Work 

Test-time guidance for generative models. A large body of work studies how to steer generative models at test time. In diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), guidance is often implemented by modifying the sampling dynamics using gradients of a conditioning signal, including classifier guidance (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), classifier-free guid-ance (Ho & Salimans, 2021), and guidance using more gen-eral functions (Song et al., 2023; Bansal et al., 2023). These techniques have also been adopted for trajectory generation in robotics, e.g., Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023), and for controllable motion prediction in multi-agent settings, e.g., MotionDiffuser (Jiang et al., 2023a). Our work differs in the mechanism used to realize test-time guidance: instead of gradient-based steering during sampling, we perform decode-and-score search over ordered latent tokens, which naturally supports objectives that are non-differentiable and can be evaluated directly on decoded trajectories even in intermediate search iterations. 

Tokenization and ordered representations. Tokenization via autoencoders is a standard technique for reducing the dimensionality of generative modeling problems. In im-age modeling, generators commonly operate in learned la-tent spaces of continuous VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2014) or discrete tokenizers such as VQ-VAE/VQGAN (van den Oord et al., 2017; Esser et al., 2021) to improve efficiency and scalability (Rombach et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024). Recently, nested dropout (Rippel et al., 2014) has been used to learn ordered and variable-length image tokenizations, inducing a coarse-to-fine hierarchy in which shorter codes capture global structure and longer codes add detail (Wen et al., 2025; Miwa et al., 2025; Bach-mann et al., 2025). We build on this perspective by learning a hierarchical trajectory representation. However, unlike image tokenizers, our trajectory tokenizer is environment-conditioned, which shifts part of the conditional modeling burden into the decoder. 

Training-free generation in tokenizer latent spaces. 

Training-free test-time generation has been explored by op-timizing latent codes of pretrained generators. Examples include optimizing GAN latents (Goodfellow et al., 2014) with CLIP-based objectives (Radford et al., 2021; Patashnik et al., 2021) and optimizing discrete tokenizer codes as in VQGAN-CLIP (Crowson et al., 2022). While such meth-ods have historically been most effective for image editing, recent work suggests that extremely high compression to-kenizers like TiTok (Yu et al., 2024) can make lightweight test-time latent manipulation surprisingly effective for gen-eration (Lao Beyer et al., 2025). Our work is inspired by the observation that extreme compression can shift gen-eration complexity toward the decoder, but differs in the inference mechanism: we leverage ordering and discretiza-2Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces Environment   

> Trajectory
> Encoder
> Decoder
> Latent Tokens
> Reconstruction Loss
> Reconstruction
> +
> Nested Dropout
> Soft Quant.
> Figure 2. Conditional autoencoder training. A conditional autoencoder is trained with a reconstruction objective to capture a highly compact latent representation of the input trajectory given a particular environment. During training, we adaptively inject noise to the latent tokens as a form of soft quantization, and apply causal masking and nested dropout to learn an ordered representation.

tion to perform tree search over tokens rather than using continuous gradient-based latent optimization. Separately, compact learned latents have also been used for control by planning over latent actions with learned dynamics using tree search (Ozair et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2023b). While algorithmically adjacent in their use of search over learned discrete representations, these methods target latent action planning rather than objective-guided trajectory generation, and are not directly comparable to our setting. 

## 3. Conditional Trajectory Autoencoder 

Trajectory prediction and planning problems in robotics must consider information such as sensor inputs or known maps. We therefore choose to represent a trajectory con-ditionally on given information about the environment and design a conditional autoencoder with the goal of learn-ing a compact and expressive latent representation of the trajectory under a particular fixed environment (Figure 2). 

Notation. We denote the environment as E. In the typical autonomous driving setting, E consists of static world fea-tures such as road edges, road lines, lane geometry, stop signs and traffic lights, as well as dynamic object history for each visible agent in the scene. The full trajectory of the agent of interest is denoted as T . The encoder Enc 

then produces a sequence of N D -dimensional latent to-kens z := {zi ∈ RD }Ni=1 = Enc (T , E) from the full tra-jectory T of the agent of interest and the environment E.The decoder Dec attempts to reconstruct the trajectory T

from the latent tokens and the environment, producing a prediction Tpred = Dec (z, E). We represent trajectories as sequences of position samples uniformly spaced in time. 

Prediction space and loss function. The decoder Dec 

predicts mean and variance parameters of a Gaussian distri-bution for each point along the trajectory, and is trained by minimizing the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the ground truth reconstruction under the prediction. In practice, we make use of the β-NLL (Seitzer et al., 2022). 

3.1. Compression via Adaptive Soft Quantization 

To mitigate training challenges commonly associated with vector quantization while maintaining its desirable regular-izing effects and enabling discrete search at test time, we use a form of soft quantization consisting of noise injection at the autoencoder bottleneck: 

corrupt (z) = tanh( z) + ϵt (1) with ϵt ∼ N (0 , Iσ 2 

> t

). Note that a tanh activation is applied pointwise to the input, effectively creating an amplitude-limited noisy channel. 1 The chosen noise level σ2 

> t

is picked adaptively during training to gradually ramp up from zero until a desired reconstruction accuracy is achieved. During training, we apply corrupt to each token zi before feeding it to the decoder. At test time, we set σt = 0 . We find that this adaptive noise schedule outperforms choosing a fixed noise level (further details can be found in Section A.4). 

Hard quantization at test time. At test time, we leverage the decoder’s ability to predict starting from heavily noised input tokens by quantizing its input. For this purpose, we round each token elementwise to the nearest discrete level, out of Nl uniformly spaced levels. While reminiscent of finite scalar quantization (FSQ) (Mentzer et al., 2024), we apply hard quantization at test time and not during training. 

3.2. Variable-Length Latent Encoding 

To allow flexible reconstruction fidelity at test time and to facilitate structured exploration of the latent space, we choose to impose a causal ordering structure on the latent tokens zi. Causality among the tokens zi is enforced via masked self-attention in the encoder and decoder networks. We additionally make use of nested dropout (Rippel et al., 2014) to allow the decoder to operate on variable-length encodings. During training, nested dropout drops a random number of tail tokens from the encoding, forcing the decoder to reconstruct the trajectory from a truncated code. 

3.3. Network Architecture 

Our conditional autoencoder is implemented using three transformer models: an environment encoder which pro-cesses static world and dynamic object history information, and encoder and decoder models which attend to the en-vironment information via cross-attention and process the latent tokens via causal self-attention. Our environment encoder follows Motion Transformer (MTR), making use of MTR’s local neighborhood attention (Shi et al., 2022). At the bottleneck, we project transformer tokens to the de-   

> 1We refer to this process as soft quantization since our corrupt
> procedure resembles an amplitude-limited Gaussian channel, for which the input distribution achieving maximum information ca-pacity is discrete (Smith, 1971).

3Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

sired low dimensionality D and during training apply nested dropout and noise corruption for soft quantization. 

Multi-agent modeling. Joint tokenization of several agents’ trajectories offers potential for learning representations that exploit the correlations between trajectories present in multi-agent interactions. The environment encoder and cross-attention blocks are unchanged compared to the single-agent model, and process each agent’s trajectory individually in the agent-centric coordinate frame. To jointly model all agents, we use self-attention blocks with a hybrid attention mask allowing each agent trajectory token to attend to the other agent trajectories bidirectionally, while latent tokens can aggregate information from the set of all agents. As before, causal masking is imposed among latent tokens. Section A.1 provides additional network architecture details. 

## 4. Latent Token Search 

Causal masking combined with nested dropout ensures that later tokens capture increasingly more fine-grained informa-tion about the encoded trajectory. Therefore, at test time, latent token sequences of any size may be used to obtain reconstructions of varying degrees of fidelity. For planning tasks, this property suggests a greedy latent space search strategy in which tokens can be picked one after another. More precisely, consider evaluating the trajectory Tpred 

according to some objective function f (Tpred ) 7 → (C, ≤C )

specified at test-time. Note that the output C can be any set admitting a total order ≤C (e.g., f can be a scalar cost or a lexicographically ordered tuple, as in Section 5.3). We seek to find the trajectory that minimizes this objective by explor-ing the latent space of our decoder as follows. Starting with the first token z1, we enumerate its possible quantized values to find the assignment minimizing the cost of the decoded trajectory f (Dec ([ z1], E)) . Tokens are intentionally low-dimensional and heavily quantized, so enumeration is cheap (we score N Dl candidates per step). We iteratively repeat this process for the next token while keeping the previous token assignments fixed. Figure 1 illustrates this procedure, visualizing how successively selected tokens progressively refine a trajectory under a goal-reaching objective. 

Variance prediction for out-of-distribution detection. Re-call that our decoder is trained to predict the parameters of a Gaussian distribution for each point along the trajectory. We find that the predicted variance is correlated with the recon-struction error (see Section A.5 for more details). Therefore, an effective strategy to detect and discard decoded trajecto-ries of poor quality is to penalize high-variance predictions. 

Optional continuous refinement. The decoder can also be evaluated on continuous latents, enabling optional gradient-based refinement of the tokens selected by discrete search, either for differentiable task objectives or auxiliary criteria such as predicted variance reduction. Discrete search re-mains essential, as continuous optimization from scratch performs substantially worse. See Section A.7 for details. 

## 5. Experiments 

In our experiments, we answer the following three questions. 

Reconstruction: does the learned encoding cover the space of trajectories sufficiently? In Section 5.1 we verify that this is the case by analyzing the autoencoder’s reconstruction accuracy. We also evaluate the ability of greedy token search to perform reconstruction, validating the effectiveness of our ordered latent representation. 

Semantics: do encodings possess a high-level semantic interpretation? In Section 5.2 we qualitatively show that behavior can be transferred between different scenarios by simply copying tokens, indicating that certain encodings can be interpreted as mapping to certain high-level behavior. 

Guidance: is token search adaptable to arbitrary objec-tive functions, other than reconstruction? In Sections 5.3 and 5.4 we present results of behavior synthesis according to a variety of objectives, including a realistic route-following objective that enables the deployment of our framework as a self-driving planner in closed-loop. In answering these questions, we consider two different datasets: the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) (Et-tinger et al., 2021) for open-loop experiments, and nu-Plan (Caesar et al., 2021) for closed-loop evaluation. We also consider two different domains: marginal single-agent as well as joint multi-agent trajectory modeling. Finally, we ablate the main representation learning design choices in Section 5.5, finding that our proposed soft quan-tization and the use of a very low-dimensional bottleneck are key to the success of our approach. 

5.1. Reconstruction Hard quantization at test-time. Before attempting discrete tree search over quantized tokens, we analyze reconstruction accuracy under hard quantization on the WOMD validation set. As shown in Table 1, we find that the conditional autoencoder’s drop in reconstruction accuracy is relatively modest even when heavily quantizing the tokens to Nl = 2 .

Greedy search. To check whether greedy token search is a suitable strategy for exploring the space of latent tokens, we consider a reconstruction objective that minimizes the average displacement error (ADE) of all position samples along the trajectory with respect to the ground truth. The greedy search with reconstruction objective forms a valid replacement for the learned encoder in our autoencoder. 4Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

Table 1. Reconstruction under quantization and with search. 

Greedy search in quantized space can match or exceed the re-construction performance of the learned encoder. ADE metric is averaged over object types and prediction horizons following WOMD convention. Nl denotes number of discretization levels. Num. tokens Average Displacement Error (ADE) ↓

Autoencoder Greedy Search 

Nl = 2 Nl = 3 cont. Nl = 2 Nl = 3 

1 0.800 0.617 0.567 0.708 0.524 

2 0.519 0.410 0.365 0.485 0.363 

3 0.403 0.334 0.298 0.386 0.301 1 2 4 8 16   

> beam size
> 0.30
> 0.35
> 0.40
> ADE
> Nl= 2
> Nl= 3
> no quant.

Figure 3. Increasing beam size in latent token search with reconstruction objective has diminishing returns. Thanks to the hierarchical structure of the learned latent space, greedy search is already an effective search strategy for reconstruction. (Blue trace: beam search results with Nl = 2 ; dashed lines: autoencoder reconstructions with and without quantization.) 

Indeed, Table 1 shows that greedy search significantly out-performs the learned encoder, demonstrating that greedy token selection is a valid approach thanks to the causal and noise-resilient structure of the autoencoder’s latent space. 

Beam search. We find that using a less greedy search algorithm leads only to marginal improvements to recon-struction accuracy. This is demonstrated in Figure 3 using beam search, which keeps a set of top candidates at each iteration, rather than just a single one. Overall, we find the latent space of our decoder is suffi-ciently expressive using just three tokens, each heavily quan-tized to only three bits. This is evidenced by a reconstruction ADE that is significantly lower than state-of-the-art motion prediction models. For example, DriveGPT achieves a min-imum ADE of 0.524 across 6 predictions (Huang et al., 2025a), while our decoder is able to reconstruct the ground truth with an ADE of 0.386. We also find that our pro-posed representation can be efficiently traversed via greedy search, enabling our latent space to represent a large library of trajectories with an efficient hierarchical structure. 

5.2. Semantics 

We qualitatively show that latent token encodings learned by our conditional autoencoder carry high-level semantic infor-mation through token swapping . Concretely, consider decod-ing the latent token representation of a given trajectory TA

Tokens copied from... A B C  

> “straight” “slow left” “fast left”
> Environment taken from...

CBA

(a) Swapping encodings between scenarios 0 10 20 30 40 50    

> x [m]
> 20
> 10
> 0
> 10
> 20
> y [m]
> Encoding 1
> Encoding 2
> Encoding 3 2468
> t [s]
> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> 20.0
> v [m/s]
> Original
> Encoding 4

(b) Tokens repeatably transfer behavior 

Figure 4. Tokens have meaningful environment-dependent se-mantics. When copying the encoding of a given trajectory under a particular environment of the WOMD test set and decoding it under a different test environment (Equation (2)), predictable behavior consistent with the new environment is produced. In (a) , Shaded plots show the reference trajectory reconstructed in its original environment, while the remaining plots correspond to decoding the trajectory’s encoding in a different environment. Note that Environ-ment C does not admit driving straight, and the decoder produces a valid alternative reconstruction (last row, first column). In (b) ,we decode each latent token encoding from a small pre-selected set (Encoding 1, 2 or 3) in many environments containing intersec-tions (left). We also select an additional Encoding 4 corresponding to a high deceleration event, and plot the speed profiles resulting from decoding it in many different environments alongside the original speed profiles from those environments (right). 

in its environment EA under a different environment EB :

TA→B = Dec (zA, EB ) with zA = Enc (TA, EA). (2) Figure 4a shows the result of this simple manipulation for selected scenarios where the agent of interest is a vehicle at an intersection. We observe that decoding an encoding corresponding to a desired behavior in a different scenario can be used to transfer this behavior to a novel scenario. Furthermore, we observe that token swapping can result in 5Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces original ego behavior generated ego behavior other agents 

Figure 5. Guided trajectory generation examples. Token search synthesizes desired behavior (left turn; green) according to a test-time user-defined objective (left turn, in this example). Compared to the original behavior recorded in the ground truth (straight; blue), the synthesized trajectory is novel in order to comply with the left-turning objective. 

Table 2. Maneuver optimization with left-turn objective. 

Greedy token search efficiently explores the conditional autoen-coder’s latent space with increasing success rate for increased search depth, while remaining robust against infeasible guidance in cases where the maneuver would be invalid. Infeasibility refers to kinematic infeasibility of the synthesized trajectory. Did turn? Edge contact Infeasibility 

Scenarios with legal left turn available (234 cases): 

Ground truth 0% 0.43% 0% Greedy (1 token) 68.4% 0.85% 0% Greedy (2 tokens) 88.0% 1.63% 1.71% Greedy (3 tokens) 90.2% 0.85% 1.28% Beam4 (3 tokens) 88.9% 0.43% 2.13% 

Scenarios without available left turn (42 cases): 

Ground truth 0% 0% 0% Greedy (1 token) 0% 2.38% 0% Greedy (2 tokens) 0% 2.38% 0% Greedy (3 tokens) 2.38% 2.38% 0% Beam4 (3 tokens) 9.52% 2.38% 2.38% 

highly repeatable behavior transfer. Figure 4b shows two examples: (i) we decode just three different encodings (cor-responding to turn directions at an intersection) in many different intersection scenarios, and (ii) we decode a sin-gle encoding corresponding to harsh deceleration, again in many different environments. In both cases, decoding the reference encoding in novel environments reliably results in the desired behavior being transferred, suggesting a class of maneuvers may be characterized by a particular token sequence in an interpretable way. 

5.3. Guidance 

Token swapping offers a simple, single-step editing primi-tive, but it cannot in general optimize an arbitrary objective or incorporate complex preferences. In this section we there-fore use guided search over tokens to produce trajectories that satisfy a desired behavior. We begin with a detailed analysis of open-loop maneuver editing performance accord-ing to two separate objectives (Tables 2 and 3) and conclude with closed-loop planning results on the closed-loop nu-Plan benchmark (Table 4). The experiments in this section make use of the variance-based out-of-distribution detection described at the end of Section 4. 

Maneuver editing. We synthesize maneuvers according to the following objectives. 

Table 3. Maneuver optimization with lane-change objective. We again find increasing success rate for increased search depth with a non-differentiable, lexicographic lane change objective that first enforces the desired number of lane changes and then minimizes lane deviation. LC success refers to executing the desired number of lane changes. LC success Center dist. Avg. speed 

Objective: zero lane changes 

Ground truth 0% 0.629 17.14 Greedy (1 token) 100% 0.287 16.22 Greedy (2 tokens) 100% 0.229 16.05 Greedy (3 tokens) 100% 0.218 15.96 Beam4 (3 tokens) 100% 0.205 15.88 

Objective: one lane change 

Ground truth 100% 0.629 17.14 Greedy (1 token) 53.85% 0.669 18.28 Greedy (2 tokens) 97.60% 0.700 17.92 Greedy (3 tokens) 99.04% 0.670 17.75 Beam4 (3 tokens) 100% 0.630 17.18 

Left-turn objective — This objective directly maximizes the cumulative leftward heading change along the trajectory and penalizes excessive curvature. Since it does not take into ac-count road geometry or obstacles at all and completely lacks realism or safety components, this objective is unsuitable for use in a traditional trajectory optimization framework. 

Lane-change objective — We design a lexicographically or-dered lane-change objective with a non-differentiable com-ponent. The objective first counts the integer number of lane changes as detected by changes in which lane center is closest. It then computes a lane-centering component which measures the deviation from the closest lane’s centerline. The minimization target is the tuple containing the (integer) count of excess or missing lane changes followed by the (real-valued) lane-centering residual. Table 2 presents the results of the left turn experiment, which demonstrates that token search with the simple left turn ob-jective is able to achieve a high rate of success in cases where a left turn is indeed available, while remaining robust against invalid guidance provided by this objective in cases where a left turn is not available. For this evaluation, we filter the WOMD validation set to collect scenarios with the ego vehicle traversing an all-way stop intersection in the straight direction. We then subdivide these scenarios into (i) a subset where a legal left turn is possible and (ii) a 6Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

subset in which a left turn is not possible. Success rate 2 is significantly improved with increasing search depth, demon-strating the importance of maintaining a large library of maneuvers as well as the effectiveness of greedy search in efficiently traversing it. Furthermore, note that the decoder automatically ensures that behavior is consistent with the given scenario as evidenced by near-zero rates of contact between the predicted trajectory and road edge geometry, and near-zero rates of left-turning in scenarios without an available left turn. Example scenarios showing the original and newly synthesized behavior can be found in Figure 5. Table 3 presents the results of the lane-change experiment. Full-depth greedy search yields near-perfect compliance with the desired number of lane changes while minimizing lane center deviation, demonstrating that latent token search can effectively optimize non-differentiable, structured ob-jectives. We select 208 WOMD validation scenarios with a ground-truth left lane change. In Table 3 we report average speed as a diagnostic signal and to confirm forward progress. The filtered scenarios often correspond to overtaking ma-neuvers and we observe that the generated speed profiles are consistent with slower driving when suppressing a lane change, while matching the ground-truth speed otherwise. Throughout our experiments, we also include beam search with a beam size of four ( Beam4 in Tables 2 and 3). While Beam4 yields a small improvement in lane-centering in our lane-change experiments, the left-turn experiment shows that broader search can reduce validity, e.g., by increasing left-turn rates in scenes where a left turn is unavailable (Ta-ble 2). For these intentionally underspecified objectives, broader search can exploit loopholes in the objective and decoder imperfections. In contrast, greedy search is both more computationally efficient and a conservative default that biases solutions toward more robust, realistic behavior. See Section A.6 for details and experiments with an addi-tional speed reduction objective. 

Closed-loop planning. To evaluate latent token search in closed loop we turn to the nuPlan dataset and simula-tor (Caesar et al., 2021). As opposed to WOMD, this dataset includes target route information and proposes a closed-loop simulation challenge based on route following. For our nu-Plan experiments, we train a trajectory autoencoder on the nuPlan dataset. Following standard practice, we apply ego history dropout during training (Cheng et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025) and include an auxiliary object collision loss. However, in our case no route conditioning is included at training time. Instead, we implement a route-following plan-                                                                                         

> 2Successful turning is defined as achieving a cumulative left-ward heading change of over 45 ◦. Before computing this metric, we fit a B-spline to the planner’s output to ensure robustness against any potential noise in the model output. We do not include spline fitting as part of the test-time objective used in search.
> Table 4. Closed-loop planning results on nuPlan. We build a closed-loop planner based on latent token search by employ-ing a test-time route-following objective. Evaluated on the
> Reduced-Val14 split from Dauner et al. (2023), our planner performs on par with recent imitation learning (IL) baselines de-spite being trained without any route conditioning. Type Method CLS-NR ↑S-CR ↑S-PR ↑
> Rule PDM-Closed (Dauner et al., 2023) 91.21 97.01 92.68 RL Gen-Drive (Huang et al., 2025b) 87.53 95.72 89.94 CarPlanner (Zhang et al., 2025) 91.45 96.38 95.37 IL GameFormer (Huang et al., 2023) 83.76 94.73 88.12 PlanTF (Cheng et al., 2024) 83.66 94.02 92.67 Gen-Drive (Huang et al., 2025b) 85.12 93.65 86.64 Latent token search (ours) 86.71 95.91 87.31
> Table 5. Ablation study on nuPlan. We first ablate design choices in the search algorithm: search depth ( depth ), beam size ( beam ), and usage of gradient-based latent token optimization after search (opt. ). We then ablate components in our cost function: the route progress cost ( route ) and the road edge collision cost ( edge ). Depth Beam Opt. Route Edge CLS-NR ↑S-CR ↑S-PR ↑
> Search algorithm ablations:
> 31✓✓85.35 95.28 87.09 32✓✓86.12 95.60 86.79 34✓✓84.97 93.71 88.66 42✓✓85.44 95.60 87.38 32✓✓✓86.71 95.91 87.31
> Cost function ablations:
> 32✓✓86.27 95.60 87.43 32✓78.42 95.60 71.84

ner by leveraging the test-time flexibility enabled by latent token search. In particular, we consider an objective that seeks to maximize progress along the route (measured as arclength traversed along a reference path extracted from nuPlan’s route specification) while penalizing excessive de-viation from the route. We find that latent token search with our simple route follow-ing objective performs on par with recent imitation learning planners despite being trained without any route condition-ing. While recent RL-based approaches can achieve even better performance (Zhang et al., 2025), we see RL and other architectural improvements as orthogonal to our ap-proach, as they can be readily incorporated into our training procedure or decoder architecture in the future. Detailed results on nuPlan’s closed-loop benchmark with nonreactive agents, including the final aggregate score (CLS-NR) as well as collision rate with other agents or objects (S-CR) and route progress (S-PR) scores, are presented in Table 4. 

Closed-loop planner ablations. In Table 5, we vary search depth, beam size and usage of a simple continuous latent token refinement step (details on this step can be found in Section A.7). We find that a search depth of N = 3 and a small beam size of two perform best, demonstrating the value of maintaining a large library of maneuvers combined 7Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces                                           

> Table 6. Multi-agent trajectory generation with terminal position guidance. Compared to baselines on WOMD’s interactive validation split, our method achieves the best realism while maintaining centimeter-level adherence to the desired terminal position. Realism Constraint Effectiveness Method Gradient-free? minADE 6↓meanADE ↓minFDE 6↓meanFDE ↓
> Optimization baseline (Jiang et al., 2023a) No 4.563 5.385 0.010 0.074
> CTG (Zhong et al., 2023) No 1.180 1.947 0.515 0.838 MotionDiffuser (Jiang et al., 2023a) No 0.533 2.194 0.007 0.747 Consistency model (Li et al., 2025) No 0.490 –0.008 –Latent token search (ours) Yes 0.496 0.767 0.399 0.974 Latent token search + token opt. (ours) No 0.459 0.684 0.093 0.141

with a greedy traversal strategy. Consistent with findings that compression is key to the decoder’s generative capabili-ties from the image domain (Lao Beyer et al., 2025), we find that reducing compression leads to reduced performance (see N = 4 experiment), and consistent with our prior ex-periments, we find that greedy search or a small beam size of two works best. We validate our route-following objec-tive by disabling it, which leads to significantly reduced aggregate and route-progress scores. Adding a term to ex-plicitly penalize road edge collisions can lead to a small improvement to the aggregate score. Finally, performing a small number of gradient-based optimization steps with a predictive variance minimization objective yields a further small improvement (note that this optional post-processing step does not require the main route following objective itself to be differentiable). 

Computational efficiency. With the parameters of N = 3 ,

D = 3 and Nl = 2 used for most experiments in this section, greedy search requires just 24 evaluations of the decoder. On the NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU, this translates to about 115 trajectories per second, corresponding to about 2760 decoder calls per second. Note also that each call to the environment encoder is amortized across 24 decoder calls during search. 

5.4. Guidance for Multi-Agent Trajectory Generation 

We train a multi-agent trajectory autoencoder with N = 12 

tokens and token dimensionality D = 3 . We again impose binary quantization ( Nl = 2 ) at test time. Following MotionDiffuser’s evaluation protocol (Jiang et al., 2023a), we consider an objective which minimizes the final displacement error (FDE) defined as the Euclidean distance between each agent’s terminal position and the ground truth trajectory’s last point. We then validate the effectiveness of latent token search by evaluating realism, as measured by adherence of the generated trajectories to the ground truth trajectories quantified using the average displacement error (ADE) averaged over predicted agents, prediction horizons and object types, following the WOMD convention. Our baselines draw 64 samples for the evaluation of minADE 

and meanADE metrics. We therefore also generate 64 can-goal           

> t= 0 s
> t= 8 s
> (a) Generated scenario 1 (b) Generated scenario 2
> vehicle yields to pedestrian vehicle crosses after pedestrian
> Figure 6. Multi-agent token search generates consistent joint trajectories. We generate scenarios (a) and (b) in the same envi-ronment by performing token search to minimize the deviation be-tween the final position of the pedestrian (blue) and a user-specified goal point (cross marker). This objective function only supervises the final position of the pedestrian, yet our joint trajectory decoder ensures the behavior of the vehicle (green) is valid.

didates by performing beam search with a beam size of 64, and then evaluate minADE , which returns the lowest ADE from among the 6 candidates with the best objective value. For the evaluation of meanADE we generate a single sam-ple using greedy search, since our method is deterministic. The min/mean FDE scores are defined analogously. Since terminal position guidance is an objective that can benefit from micro-adjustments to the final trajectory, we leverage our decoder’s ability to handle continuous tokens and op-tionally include gradient-based optimization of the latent tokens after running search (see Section A.7). As shown in Table 6, compared to controllable trajectory generation baselines from the literature, our latent token search achieves significantly better realism. The improve-ment in performance is particularly pronounced when con-sidering mean metrics, highlighting that diffusion methods heavily rely on filtering of samples to achieve good perfor-mance, while our latent token search can reliably generate realistic samples without any filtering. As in the single-agent case, selecting the search depth can control the bal-ance between realism and objective maximization, which we explore in Section A.8. 

Qualitative example. While in the previous experiment we impose guidance on every agent’s terminal position, in Figure 6 we guide the terminal goal position for only a 

8Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces                            

> Table 7. Effect of token dimensionality on reconstruction and guided generation. Reconstruction is evaluated using the learned encoder ( AE ), with and without test-time quantization, and using search with a reconstruction objective. Guided generation uses a goal-reaching objective; ADE measures full-trajectory realism, while FDE measures terminal goal error. Quantization and search use binary quantization ( Nl= 2 ). Reconstruction ADE Guided generation Dim. AE cont. AE quant. Search ADE FDE
> D= 2 0.511 0.623 0.593 0.738 1.615
> D= 3 0.465 0.559 0.505 0.669 1.104
> D= 4 0.462 0.539 0.417 0.736 0.757

single agent in the scene . In this case, the joint trajectory decoder is able to synthesize joint trajectories in which the behavior of other agents, whose trajectories do not receive any direct guidance, is consistent. 

5.5. Representation Learning Ablations 

We conclude the experimental evaluation with ablations of the main representation-learning design choices underlying our conditional autoencoder and latent token search. All models in this section are trained for approximately 30% 

of the number of steps used for the main experiments. We evaluate each model on three tasks: (i) reconstruction us-ing the learned encoder, both with and without test-time quantization; (ii) reconstruction using latent token search with a reconstruction objective; and (iii) guided generation using a goal-reaching objective that minimizes distance to the ground-truth terminal position. 

Token dimensionality. We first vary the token dimension-ality D. As shown in Table 7, reconstruction performance improves with increasing token dimensionality, both for the learned encoder and for search with a reconstruction objective. However, the guided generation results in Ta-ble 7 show a trade-off between representation capacity and generation quality. While the goal-point error, measured by FDE, improves monotonically with increasing dimen-sionality, the full-trajectory ADE does not. This suggests that when dense supervision is available, as in reconstruc-tion, higher-capacity tokens improve reconstruction quality. In contrast, when guidance is sparse, as in terminal goal reaching, it is useful to rely more strongly on the decoder by reducing the capacity of its input tokens. In our experi-ments, D = 3 provides the best trade-off between trajectory realism and controllability. 

Architecture and training recipe. We next ablate the main architectural and training choices: causal masking, nested dropout, and the use of soft quantization during training rather than FSQ (Mentzer et al., 2024). The results in Ta-ble 8 show that nested dropout is critical for inducing the desired coarse-to-fine hierarchy among latent tokens. With-                         

> Table 8. Ablation of architectural and training choices on reconstruction and guided generation. The experimental setup follows that from Table 7. Reconstruction ADE Guided generation Ablation AE cont. AE quant. Search ADE FDE Proposed model 0.465 0.559 0.505 0.669 1.104
> No causal masking 0.492 0.789 0.490 0.673 1.098
> No nested dropout 0.438 0.525 1.153 1.385 4.145 FSQ 0.681 0.684 0.569 0.724 1.395

out nested dropout, learned-encoder reconstruction when given the full set of tokens remains strong, but search per-formance degrades substantially, indicating that the latent space is no longer organized in a way that can be efficiently explored by greedy token search. Causal masking has only a small effect on search performance, although removing it worsens reconstruction under quantization. We also find that our proposed soft quantization during train-ing, followed by hard quantization at test time, significantly outperforms applying FSQ during training across all metrics including both reconstruction and generation. Furthermore, FSQ appears to reduce the benefit of continuous refinement after search: unlike the soft-quantization setting, remov-ing test-time quantization from the autoencoder does not substantially improve reconstruction. 

## 6. Conclusion 

We propose a guided generative model in which test-time objectives are optimized by decode-and-score search over an ordered, highly compressed latent code. By making partial token prefixes directly decodable and scorable in trajectory space, this interface supports a large class of test-time objectives without task-specific training, while relying on a learned decoder to enforce realism. We deploy our method in autonomous driving, but hope the underlying idea can find broad applications in controllable generation. 

Limitations and future work. Our experiments focus on autonomous driving, where trajectories are relatively low-dimensional and strong contextual priors are available from maps and agent histories. An important direction for future work is therefore to extend compressed, ordered trajectory representations to other robotics domains, such as manipu-lation, which introduce higher-dimensional state and action spaces or contact-rich dynamics. Furthermore, our experi-ments show success of greedy search for a variety of driving-related test-time objectives. However, future work could include evaluation on tasks with even richer and longer-horizon structure, and explore additional classes of latent search and optimization algorithms. 9Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

## Impact Statement 

This work supports test-time controllable trajectory gen-eration for robotics. In safety-critical domains (e.g., au-tonomous driving), responsible deployment requires ex-tensive validation and system-level safeguards beyond the scope of this paper. The methods presented in this work may find additional applications beyond robotics. As with other work whose goal it is to advance the field of machine learning, controllable generation in other domains may have many potential societal consequences, none of which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. 

## References 

Bachmann, R., Allardice, J., Mizrahi, D., Fini, E., Kar, O. F., Amirloo, E., El-Nouby, A., Zamir, A., and Dehghan, A. FlexTok: Resampling images into 1D token sequences of flexible length. arXiv 2025 , 2025. Bansal, A., Chu, H.-M., Schwarzschild, A., Sengupta, S., Goldblum, M., Geiping, J., and Goldstein, T. Universal guidance for diffusion models. In Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 843–852, 2023. Caesar, H., Kabzan, J., Tan, K. S., Fong, W. K., Wolff, E., Lang, A., Fletcher, L., Beijbom, O., and Omari, S. NuPlan: A closed-loop ML-based planning benchmark for autonomous vehicles. In CVPR ADP3 workshop ,2021. Chang, H., Zhang, H., Jiang, L., Liu, C., and Freeman, W. T. MaskGIT: Masked generative image transformer. In 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,June 2022. Cheng, J., Chen, Y., Mei, X., Yang, B., Li, B., and Liu, M. Rethinking imitation-based planners for autonomous driving. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pp. 14123–14130, 2024. Chi, C., Feng, S., Du, Y., Xu, Z., Cousineau, E., Burchfiel, B., and Song, S. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2023. Crowson, K., Biderman, S., Kornis, D., Stander, D., Hal-lahan, E., Castricato, L., and Raff, E. VQGAN-CLIP: Open domain image generation and editing with natural language guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08583 ,2022. Darcet, T., Oquab, M., Mairal, J., and Bojanowski, P. Vision transformers need registers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Dauner, D., Hallgarten, M., Geiger, A., and Chitta, K. Part-ing with misconceptions about learning-based vehicle mo-tion planning. In Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. Dhariwal, P. and Nichol, A. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021. Esser, P., Rombach, R., and Ommer, B. Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 12873– 12883, June 2021. Ettinger, S., Cheng, S., Caine, B., Liu, C., Zhao, H., Prad-han, S., Chai, Y., Sapp, B., Qi, C. R., Zhou, Y., et al. Large scale interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driv-ing: The Waymo open motion dataset. In International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 9710–9719, 2021. Foehn, P., Romero, A., and Scaramuzza, D. Time-optimal planning for quadrotor waypoint flight. Science Robotics ,6(56):eabh1221, 2021. Frazzoli, E., Dahleh, M. A., and Feron, E. Maneuver-based motion planning for nonlinear systems with symmetries. 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , 21(6):1077–1091, 2005. Goh, J. Y. and Gerdes, J. C. Simultaneous stabilization and tracking of basic automobile drifting trajectories. In IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium , pp. 597–602, 2016. Goodfellow, I. J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 27, 2014. Ho, J. and Salimans, T. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications , 2021. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. Huang, X., Wolff, E. M., Vernaza, P., Phan-Minh, T., Chen, H., Hayden, D. S., Edmonds, M., Pierce, B., Chen, X., Jacob, P. E., Chen, X., Tairbekov, C., Agarwal, P., Gao, T., Chai, Y., and Srinivasa, S. DriveGPT: Scaling autore-gressive behavior models for driving. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025a. Huang, Z., Liu, H., and Lv, C. Gameformer: Game-theoretic modeling and learning of transformer-based interactive prediction and planning for autonomous driving. In Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 3903–3913, October 2023. 10 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

Huang, Z., Weng, X., Igl, M., Chen, Y., Cao, Y., Ivanovic, B., Pavone, M., and Lv, C. Gen-drive: Enhancing dif-fusion generative driving policies with reward modeling and reinforcement learning fine-tuning. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pp. 3445–3451, 2025b. Jiang, C., Cornman, A., Park, C., Sapp, B., Zhou, Y., Anguelov, D., et al. MotionDiffuser: Controllable multi-agent motion prediction using diffusion. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 9644– 9653, 2023a. Jiang, Z., Zhang, T., Janner, M., Li, Y., Rockt ¨aschel, T., Grefenstette, E., and Tian, Y. Efficient planning in a compact latent action space. International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023b. Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2014. Lao Beyer, L., Li, T., Chen, X., Karaman, S., and He, K. Highly compressed tokenizer can generate without train-ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,July 2025. Li, A., Bae, S., Isele, D., Beeson, R., and Tariq, F. M. Pre-dictive planner for autonomous driving with consistency models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08033 , 2025. Li, T., Tian, Y., Li, H., Deng, M., and He, K. Autoregressive image generation without vector quantization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:56424– 56445, 2024. Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-ularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Mentzer, F., Minnen, D., Agustsson, E., and Tschannen, M. Finite scalar quantization: VQ-VAE made simple. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Miwa, K., Sasaki, K., Arai, H., Takahashi, T., and Yam-aguchi, Y. One-d-piece: Image tokenizer meets quality-controllable compression. In ICML Tokenization Work-shop , 2025. Moore, J., Cory, R., and Tedrake, R. Robust post-stall perching with a simple fixed-wing glider using lqr-trees. 

Bioinspiration & biomimetics , 9(2):025013, 2014. Ozair, S., Li, Y., Razavi, A., Antonoglou, I., Van Den Oord, A., and Vinyals, O. Vector quantized models for planning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8302–8313. PMLR, 2021. Patashnik, O., Wu, Z., Shechtman, E., Cohen-Or, D., and Lischinski, D. StyleCLIP: Text-driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In International Conference on Com-puter Vision , pp. 2085–2094, October 2021. Pivtoraiko, M., Knepper, R. A., and Kelly, A. Differentially constrained mobile robot motion planning in state lattices. 

Journal of Field Robotics , 26(3):308–333, 2009. Qi, C. R., Su, H., Mo, K., and Guibas, L. J. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmen-tation. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 652–660, 2017. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. Rippel, O., Gelbart, M., and Adams, R. Learning ordered representations with nested dropout. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pp. 1746–1754. PMLR, 2014. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 10684–10695, 2022. Seitzer, M., Tavakoli, A., Antic, D., and Martius, G. On the pitfalls of heteroscedastic uncertainty estimation with probabilistic neural networks. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2022. Shi, S., Jiang, L., Dai, D., and Schiele, B. Motion trans-former with global intention localization and local move-ment refinement. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 35:6531–6543, 2022. Smith, J. G. The information capacity of amplitude- and variance-constrained scalar Gaussian channels. Informa-tion and control , 18(3):203–219, 1971. Song, J., Zhang, Q., Yin, H., Mardani, M., Liu, M.-Y., Kautz, J., Chen, Y., and Vahdat, A. Loss-guided diffusion models for plug-and-play controllable generation. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 32483–32498. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. van den Oord, A., Vinyals, O., and Kavukcuoglu, K. Neural discrete representation learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. Wen, X., Zhao, B., Elezi, I., Deng, J., and Qi, X. “Princi-pal components” enable a new language of images. In 

International Conference on Computer Vision , 2025. 11 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

Yu, Q., Weber, M., Deng, X., Shen, X., Cremers, D., and Chen, L.-C. An image is worth 32 tokens for reconstruc-tion and generation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 38, 2024. Zhang, D., Liang, J., Guo, K., Lu, S., Wang, Q., Xiong, R., Miao, Z., and Wang, Y. Carplanner: Consistent auto-regressive trajectory planning for large-scale reinforce-ment learning in autonomous driving. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 17239– 17248, 2025. Zhong, Z., Rempe, D., Xu, D., Chen, Y., Veer, S., Che, T., Ray, B., and Pavone, M. Guided conditional diffu-sion for controllable traffic simulation. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pp. 3560–3566, 2023. 12 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

## A. Appendix 

A.1. Conditional Autoencoder Model Transformer Encoder           

> ……
> Causal Self Attention
> ……
> Cross Attention
> ×N enc
> Causal Self Attention
> Cross Attention
> ×N dec
> Bottleneck
> Static World Agent History
> Trajectory Recons.
> key/value key/val
> Bottleneck:
> Linear: D×C enc
> Adaptive Soft Quantization
> zi
> Linear: C dec ×D
> Nested Dropout

Figure A1. Conditional autoencoder architecture. The environment (static world, dynamic object histories) is tokenized and fed into a transformer encoder consisting of local neighborhood self-attention layers. The processed tokens form the key and value for the cross-attention-based encoder and decoder transformers. Encoder and decoder impose causal masking among latent tokens. 

A graphical overview of the design of our trajectory conditional autoencoder is shown in Figure A1. 

Trajectory and environment tokenization. We use a similar strategy to MTR (Shi et al., 2022). Agent trajectories are augmented with additional metadata (object type, timestep index, heading angle, and relative position between consecutive samples) and encoded with a PointNet architecture (Qi et al., 2017). Road edges and road lines are split into 20-point segments and also encoded using a small PointNet-style network. In contrast to the original MTR, we encode each feature in the local coordinate frame placed at its initial pose (for agent trajectories) or center of mass (for road geometry). 

Transformer models. The environment encoder, taking as input the tokenized static world and agent history representations, uses local self attention layers to improve efficiency and incorporate a spatial locality bias. We again closely follow MTR (Shi et al., 2022) in this regard. Our trajectory encoder and decoder make use of blocks of causal self-attention followed by cross-attention. In the case of the encoder, the queries are initialized from the following tokens: (a) the token encoding of the full input trajectory, (b) learnable positional encodings for the latent tokens and (c) one or more additional register tokens (Darcet et al., 2024) (not shown in the diagram in Figure A1). Even though the number of key/value tokens produced by the environment encoder may be large, we do not use any form of local attention or geometric aggregation, since cross-attention with respect to our small number of query tokens is sufficiently fast. The latent tokens are then processed by the bottleneck consisting of projection to the desired token dimensionality and noise injection (during training) or hard quantization (at test time). After projecting back to the transformer feature dimensionality, the decoder processes the latent tokens with the same design as the encoder, noting that we again include one or more register tokens with learnable positional embedding. Finally, we regress the final trajectory from one of the register tokens using a small MLP. In both our trajectory encoder and decoder’s self-attention layers, causal masking is enforced between the latent tokens, while register and input trajectory tokens may attend to all tokens. 

A.2. Multi-Agent Model Details 

As illustrated in Figure A2, the multi-agent version of our conditional trajectory autoencoder consists of cross-attention layers to aggregate environment information (identical to the single-agent case) interleaved with self-attention layers that can aggregate information from all trajectories among each other and into the causally masked latent tokens. For invariance to global coordinate transformations, we encode the environment in each agent’s local coordinate frame. For invariance to different ordering of the input trajectories, we do not add any positional encoding to the trajectory embeddings fed to the encoder, relying on the transformer’s natural permutation equivariance. To also preserve equivariance in the decoder, we again do not add a traditional positional encoding to the input trajectory tokens. Instead, we compute a relative pose embedding for each agent a by first computing the pose of all other modeled agents in a’s frame and then processing those poses with a permutation equivariant PointNet-style encoder. 13 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces Self Attention   

> Cross Attention
> Cross Attention
> key/value
> Env 0
> Trajectory 0
> ×N dec
> Cross Attention
> Trajectory 1
> Trajectory N
> Env 1
> Env N
> key/value
> key/value
> …
> Self Attention
> Cross Attention
> Trajectory 0
> Trajectory 1
> Trajectory N
> …
> Cross Attention
> key/value
> Env 0
> ×N enc
> Cross Attention
> Env 1
> Env N
> key/value
> key/value
> Bottleneck
> Nested Dropout
> full attention
> causally masked
> full attention
> causally masked
> Rel. posenc 0
> Rel. posenc 1
> Rel. posenc N
> …

Figure A2. Multi-agent conditional autoencoder architecture. 

A.3. Model Hyperparameters 

The following hyperparameters are shared across the environment encoder model, the trajectory encoder, and the trajectory decoder: • Layers: 6 • Heads: 8 • Transformer feature dimensionality: 256 • Feed-forward MLP width: 2048 We use these parameters for both the single- and multi-agent experiments. 

Token dropout schedule. During training, we perform token dropout with 50% probability. If dropout is enabled, we choose the number of tokens to keep according to an exponential schedule with probabilities proportional to (1 /2) Ndrop ,where Ndrop denotes the number of tokens to drop. 

Other training details. We train our models using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) with a batch size of 64, learning rate of 10 −5 and weight decay of 0.02 . For adaptive soft quantization, we set γ = 0 .9995 and ∆σ = 0 .01 (see Section A.4). Our single-agent WOMD model is trained on around 70M samples, and we train our nuPlan and multi-agent WOMD models for around 300M samples. 

A.4. Adaptive Noise Injection 

During training, we apply a simple elementwise corruption 

tanh( z) + ϵt where ϵt ∼ N (0 , Iσ 2 

> t

),

to each token z in order to support test-time quantization. We find that choosing σt to adaptively ramp up significantly improves convergence during training. Concretely, we dynamically choose σt based on the average displacement error (ADE) averaged across every prediction in the current training minibatch ADE t:

σt = max(0 , γσ t−1 + (1 − γ)ˆ σt) (3) with ˆσt =

(

σt−1 + ∆ σ ADE t ≤ ADE target 

σt−1 − ∆σ ADE t > ADE target 

. (4) Here, ADE target denotes the target training ADE and is a fixed hyperparameter. Likewise, the decay factor γ ∈ [0 , 1) and the noise increment ∆σ > 0 can be used to tune the responsiveness of the adaptive schedule to changes in ADE t.14 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 1.0      

> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 2.0
> Val. ADE
> 1.0
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 2.0
> Train ADE
> 05M 10M 15M 20M 25M
> Number of training examples
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> Noise level  t
> Fixed Noise
> Adaptive

Figure A3. Adaptive noise injection outperforms fixed noise level. Note that validation ADE is lower than training ADE since σt = 0 

during validation. 

A unique advantage of this approach is that it yields a decoder that can optionally accept hard-discretized latents at test-time, while retaining the ability to use continuous latents (we exploit this property in Section A.7). Therefore, our diagnostic experiment in Figure A3 does not directly compare against methods using hard quantization such as VQ-VAE (van den Oord et al., 2017) or FSQ (Mentzer et al., 2024). 

A.5. Predictive Uncertainty Calibration 

We empirically validate the quality of our model’s predictive variance by performing a risk-coverage analysis using 1500 randomly selected WOMD validation scenarios. Our results indicate that the model’s variance output is predictive of the reconstruction error and motivates our variance-based token rejection. This holds when not using any test-time quantization as well as when aggressively quantizing to Nl = 2 , as shown in Table A1. FDE refers to the mean absolute deviation of the final sample of the trajectory. 

Table A1. Predictive uncertainty risk coverage analysis. 

Coverage FDE (no quant.) FDE ( Nl = 2 )5% 0.17 0.25 15% 0.35 0.55 20% 0.50 0.75 35% 0.63 0.94 65% 0.74 1.09 80% 0.83 1.23 95% 0.95 1.39 

A.6. Details on Planning Objective Functions 

Our framework supports general objectives of the form 

f (Tpred , z ) 7 → (C, ≤C ), (5) where Tpred = Dec (z, E) refers to the decoded trajectory, and z is the tokenized representation. In the main text we have considered the left-turn objective with C = R as well as a lane-change objective with C = N × R under a lexicographic order that first prioritizes the correct number of lane changes and then minimizes a continuous lane centerline deviation. In our experiments, we consider objectives that penalize high predictive variance, taking the following form. Letting n

denote the length of the token sequence z (starting at n = 1 at the beginning of search and increasing to n = N once the maximum depth is reached), 

fg (Tpred , z ) := g(T (μxy ) 

> pred

) + λ1[T (σxy ) 

> pred

> σ max (n)] . (6) Here, T (μxy ) 

> pred

refers to the decoder’s predicted mean of the trajectory. We use T (σxy ) 

> pred

to denote the magnitude of the 15 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 

predicted covariance for the final sample of the trajectory, which we check against the threshold σmax (n) to impose a heavy penalty λ ≫ g(T (μxy ) 

> pred

).0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40     

> predicted variance at final trajectory sample xy
> pred
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> density
> n= 1
> n= 2
> n= 3

Figure A4. Predicted variance decreases with increas-ing number of tokens. Histogram of predicted vari-ance values illustrates need for token-sequence-length-dependent variance threshold during search. 

We find that an uncertainty threshold which depends on the token sequence length is beneficial, as the distribution of the predicted variance depends strongly on the length of the latent token encoding (see Figure A4). This leaves us to freely choose the cost function g

based on the desired target application. 

Left turn maneuver optimization. The heading θ[i] along each segment i of the polyline defined by the current candidate trajectory 

T (μxy ) 

> pred

is first computed using finite differences. We similarly compute the curvature κ[i]. We can then compute the total cumulative heading change in the counterclockwise direction as CCW = P 

> i

max(0 , θ [i+1] − θ[i]) . This allows us to define the very straightforward cost function 

gleft (T (μxy ) 

> pred

) := − min {CCW , θ min } + λκ1{max  

> i

κ[i] > κ max }, (7) which encourages turns with a leftward heading change of at least θmin (which we set to π 

> 4

) while rejecting excessive curvature maneuvers (we set κmax = 0 .35 very high so that this constraint is rarely active, but κmax could be tuned to match actual vehicle kinematics). In addition to Table 2, we present visualizations of the left turn maneuver optimization in Figure A5 across all scenarios, including those in which a left turn is not available. We highlight that the fact that token search is not always able to achieve the desired heading change is a desirable property: as shown in Figure A5c, our examples include cases where left turns are illegal or impossible. We also highlight that the ultimate heading change achieved by our token search is not simply clustered around the threshold θmin , indicating that token search finds solutions that align with the correct road geometry rather than blindly optimizing the objective which, if used on its own to optimize a less robust trajectory representation, would be far too simple to produce correct behavior (Figure A5a). 

Speed reduction. We select ∼800 test scenarios in which a vehicle is traveling at an initial speed of around 9 m /s and maintains a similar average speed throughout its full trajectory. In this case, our objective is to slow down to a lower final speed of 5 m /s maintained for the last three seconds of the trajectory. Our choice of g is again very simple: 

gslowdown (T (μxy ) 

> pred

) := max  

> i∈I

max {0, v i − vmax }, (8) with vi denoting the magnitude of the velocity along the ith segment of the trajectory, again computed using finite differences, 

vmax denoting the maximum speed constraint value ( 5 m /s in our experiment) and I denoting the range of timesteps to apply the constraint over (in our experiment we apply it from t = 6 s to the end of the predicted trajectory at t = 9 s ). 

Table A2. Speed profile optimization via token search. 

Success Rate Edge Contact None (original scenario) 0% 0.76% Token search (1 token) 28.7% 0.63% Token search (2 tokens) 55.4% 0.38% 

Token search (all 3 tokens) 63.2% 0.13% 

As shown in Table A2, token search does not enjoy a 100% success rate. However, we argue that this behavior is desirable, allowing even very naively specified objec-tive functions to produce reasonable real-world behavior thanks to the decoder serving as a form of “learned guard rails.” Indeed, we show in Figure A6c that our framework makes a best effort to increase deceleration while main-taining smooth and safe longitudinal jerk and acceleration values. 16 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 0

> 4
> 8
> density

Original   

> 042
> 34
> cumulative heading change
> 0
> 1
> 2
> density

Search Result 

(a) Distribution of leftward heading change. 0 10 20 30 40  

> x [m]
> 10
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> y [m]
> original
> search result

(b) Top-down view of original and search trajectories. 

(c) Typical “failure” cases: left turn would be impossible or illegal (due to not using the dedicated turn lane). We plot the trajectory found by token search with the left turn objective. 

Figure A5. Search for left-turn maneuver. Scenarios are selected by agent’s proximity to several stop signs, while moving straight. Some cases where a left turn is not available are included. 0 5 10 15 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> density

Original    

> 0510 15
> final speed [m/s]
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> density

Search Result 

(a) Distribution of final speed. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

> t [s]
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 14
> v [m/s]
> original
> search result

(b) Speed profiles of original and search trajectories. 2 1 0 1 2

> maximum deceleration [m/s^2]
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> density
> original
> search result

(c) Histogram showing maximum deceleration in scenarios where search with speed reduction objective failed to achieve the desired speed reduction. Note that original scenarios are almost exclusively cases with no deceleration or even strong acceleration, and search is able to significantly increase the amount of deceleration. 

Figure A6. Slow-down maneuver optimization. Scenarios are collected by filtering based on the agent’s starting speed. 

17 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces   

> Table A3. Failure of standalone continuous optimization without search. Standalone optimization is unable to match realism (as indicated by ADE) and objective satisfaction (as measured by FDE) achieved by search or search with optimization as a post-processing step, even when using a larger number of optimizer iterations or initializations. We evaluate on a random 1024-example subset of WOMD’s interactive validation split.

Search Opt. iter Num. seeds ADE ↓ FDE ↓

Yes 0 – 0.793 0.948 

Yes 40 1 0.716 0.091 

No 40 1 1.474 3.743 No 120 1 1.352 2.680 No 40 8 0.974 1.188 No 120 8 0.944 0.861 

A.7. Gradient-Based Token Optimization 

In both our closed-loop nuPlan evaluation as well as the multi-agent guided generation experiments we make use of optional gradient-based latent token optimization to boost performance. This simple post-processing step uses the solution found by search as a high quality seed that can be iteratively optimized further according to the same or a different objective. We implement this token optimization via gradient descent, directly backpropagating gradients from the computed objective value to the latent tokens. In practice, we use Adam with a learning rate of 0.1, optimizing for 5 iterations in the nuPlan experiment (Tables 4 and 5) and for 40 iterations in the multi-agent generation experiment from Table 6. 

Predictive variance minimization. For the nuPlan experiment (Tables 4 and 5), we choose an objective used during gradient-based optimization that differs from the search objective. While search maximizes route-progress, the continuous optimization’s objective is to minimize the terminal predicted variance of the solution found by search. This choice leads to a noticeable boost in nuPlan’s aggregate closed-loop score without imposing any additional restrictions on the base objective used in search (e.g., it may still be non-differentiable, or use lexicographic ordering of multiple components). 

Final displacement error minimization. For the multi-agent guided generation experiment from Section 5.4, we use gradient-based optimization to further reduce the same final displacement error already minimized by search. While this optimization does not significantly improve realism metrics, it significantly helps to accurately enforce the prescribed final position. We conclude that gradient-based token optimization is a useful post-processing step in cases where objectives are to be tightly enforced. 

Importance of discrete search prior to optimization. We find that performing discrete search first is essential in order for the optimization to produce high quality results. To demonstrate this, we compare optimization as refinement of search solutions to standalone optimization with randomly initialized tokens. For this experiment, we use the same multi-agent goal reaching objective as used in Table 6. As illustrated in Table A3, search with no post-optimization beats all of our optimization-only results on realism (as measured by ADE) while being vastly more efficient: searching to a depth of 8 requires only 8 batched sequential calls to the decoder, taking 25 ms per scenario on our hardware (Nvidia RTX 6000 Pro). Meanwhile, the optimization-only method is only able to achieve comparable FDE at significantly worse ADE when selecting the best output among several initializations and running for an extended number of iterations, a configuration which requires 415 ms per scenario (over 16 × slower). Search followed by optimization as a post-processing step achieves the best realism and objective satisfaction. 

A.8. Search Depth Selection for Multi-Agent Guided Generation 

To explore the dependence of both realism and constraint satisfaction metrics on the search depth, we repeat the experiments from Section 5.4 for a range of possible maximum depth values. For this experiment, we evaluate a random subset of WOMD’s interactive validation split containing 1024 scenarios and do not enable gradient-based token optimization. Figure A7 presents results of our sweep. In all cases, we find that increasing the search depth leads to improved FDE, as expected due to the coarse-to-fine structure of our latent space. However, when using greedy search to generate a single sample per scenario, we observe that ADE (our proxy for realism) stops significantly improving after a depth of just four out of the maximum of N = 12 tokens (Figure A7a). When combining this effect with the generation of multiple candidates 18 Motion Planning in Compressed Representation Spaces 2 4 6 8 10 12 

> number of tokens
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> 1.05
> meanADE
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> meanFDE

(a) Generating a single sample to evaluate mean ADE/FDE 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12  

> number of tokens
> 0.50
> 0.52
> 0.54
> 0.56
> minADE
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> minFDE

(b) Generating multiple samples to evaluate min ADE/FDE 

Figure A7. Sweeping the maximum search depth reveals realism/constraint satisfaction tradeoff. 

via beam search, we find that it results in a reduction of realism (Figure A7b). This can be explained by considering the decreasing diversity of candidates available at the end of search at increasing search depths, i.e., at a high search depth, we expect candidates to cluster tightly around an FDE-minimizing solution, but this comes at the expense of reducing coverage and therefore increasing the likelihood of excluding the most realistic solution. Based on this observation, rather than running search for the full depth of N = 12 tokens, our experiments in Table 6 use a depth of N = 8 for generation using search only, and N = 7 for generation using search and gradient-based optimization. 19