Title: 2607.11004v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11004v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 01:36:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
1

Solvi Arnold , Rin Karashima , Tadashi Adachi , Takafumi Mochizuki , Kimitoshi Yamazaki 

Abstract —We present a manipulation planning system 

based on affordance recognition and action effect prediction. 

The system reasons through possible futures in visual form, 

and evaluates candidate plans by agreement of predicted out-

comes with text -based goals set at run -time, using a multi -

modal goal -matching module. Positions of objects named in 

the goal text a re  tracked through predictions even when oc-

cluded,  making it possible to generate action plans even when 

objects become occluded, or  when  their initial descriptors 

cease to identify them in future states . We further expand the 

system with an image conversion module  for  translat ing  real -

world state images with objects of varied shapes and visual 

appearances into a consistent visual appearance , to facilitate 

manipulation  planning  in a physical robot setup . We evaluate 

performance of  the system ’s modules  in isolation , and demon-

strate  the integrated system ’s manipulation planning  capabili-

ties  on a set of challenging  tasks  in both simulation and on 

hardware. 

Index Terms — Manipulation planning, Multi -modal  mod-

els, Affordances, Natural language instruction, Neural net-

works 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

CTION  planning has traditionally often been ad-

dressed using symbolic methods, and more recently 

using LLMs. Such methods can be effective if a 

symbolic or linguistic description can adequately convey all 

the relevant features of the task environment . However,  this is 

rarely the case in real -world manipulation scenarios , limiting 

the planning fidelity we can achieve using symbolic methods. 

Furthermore, when effect rules are defined manually, planning 

ability is constrained by the imagination of the rule -designer, 

resulting in a system than cannot reliably avoid or exploit ef-

fects and side -effects that the designe r overlooked.  Symbolic 

reasoning certainly has a role in human action planning, but 

our  reasoning is built on top of a more granular understanding 

of the physical world. 

In a robotics context,  which actions are available in a given 

situation intricately depends on the robot’s physical character-

istics and limitations.  Furthermore,  for an action to be execut-

able and reliably produce the intended effects, it has to be par-

ametrised in a manner that is translatable to unambiguous mo-

tions of the target robot platform.  Hence, for a robot t o use  its 

action repertoire  fully and  reliably,  it  must be able to  1) recog-

nise which actions are available  to  it  in a given  scene (i.e. rec-

ognise the scene ’s affordances ), and 2)  accurately anticipate 

the effects of  those  actions. 

The  abovementioned  concept of  affordance s [1]  has proven 

useful for  structuring  robot behaviour.  Assigning  regions of 

robots ’ (typically  continuous ) state space s to qualitatively dis-

tinct  affordances facilitates the formation of meaningful rela-

tions between perception and action spaces.  However, the ef-

fects of executing affordances so defined are less straightfor-

ward to model . We may assume to know our robot in detail, 

but the same assumption can generally not be made for the 

environment s in which  it  will  operate . Similar observations 

apply to biological agents. For humans  and other animals ,

nature ’s approach has been to equip us with the ability to learn 

the effects of our actions from experience. 

Based on the above , [2]  introduced a manipulation planning 

method  combining  recognition of prespecified  affordance s

with  learned  prediction of affordance effects, both implement-

ed as neural networks (NNs).  The present work  builds on  [2] ,

address ing  some of  its  limitations.  In  [2] , goals  are defined 

using images, which is inconvenient in practice.  We  introduce 

support for text -based goal definition , using a multimodal NN .

We relax the assumption that objects are known (i.e. observed 

during training) . Instead, we target varied instances from a set 

of object  classes  instead. We  introduce a  style transfer  ap-

proach using generative augmentation to allow the system to 

generalize over variation in object shape, size, and visual ap-

pearance within these classes  and enable real -world experi-

ments . We introduce  a dynamic camera  viewpoint into the 

prediction process to improve  generalization over object posi-

tions and orientations.  We enrich state representations with 

object mask channels to keep track of objects named in the 

goal text , and  enable planning for tasks involving full object 

occlusion. 

II.  RELATED  WORK 

Learning of action effects has been explored in various 

works. Early examples are found in  [3]  [4] , where transition 

rules are learned in symbolic form. This avoids the need to 

manually specify effects in advance, but the granularity of the 

predictions is similar to that of manually defined rules.  In  [5] ,

fine -grained prediction for a reachability affordance is learned 

using a Gaussian Mixture Model. This predictive ability is 

used to plan reaching motions by means of  internal rehearsal .

# Affordance -Based  Manipulation Planning with 

# Text Goals and  Sim -to -Real Generalisation via 

# Real -to -Sim Image Conversion 

# A

SA is at NICT, Japan. Work performed while at Shinshu University, Japan. 

(solvi.arnold@nict.go.jp).  RK, TA, TM are at EPSON Avasys, Japan.  KY is at 

Tohoku University, Japan.  Work performed while at Shinshu University, Japan. 2

[6]  focuses on  the formation of  compound object s resulting 

from stacking actions applied to objects of various shapes.  The 

method employs neural prediction of action effects  by means 

of a graph neural network.  However,  state and effect de-

scriptors are comparatively high -level and task -specific , and 

state  context beyond the focal objects is not considered.  More 

granular prediction for object stacking  is found  in  [7] , albeit 

for simpler objects. 

Neural prediction through multi -step action sequences  is 

found in  [8] . However, future states  are only represented in 

latent form, necessitating task -specific reinforcement learning. 

[9]  similarly employs a predictive neural architecture operat-

ing in latent space, but with focus on using the  effects  of par-

tial actions. 

A new element of our system is the addition of object masks 

to track specific objects.  Prediction over object masks  encod-

ing some semantic information  was explored in  [10] , albeit  at 

the single -object level and  without prediction of future states’ 

RGBD appearance .

In  [11] , incremental learning of skill effects  is applied to 

gradually expand a robot ’s action repertoire. However, states 

are represented in a manually designed analytical format. 

Our  work has parallels to  [12]  in the use of a multimodal 

NN to assess action quality. However, in  [12] , such a model is 

used to assess  success  probabilit ies  over sets of candidate  push 

actions in order to select the optimal action. In the present 

work, we use a multimodal NN to assess goal agreement over 

sets of state predictions. This allows quality assessment over 

action  sequences  spanning various affordance types. 

The combination of affordance -based action generation 

with language instruction is also explored in  [13] . However, 

the system in  [13]  expects direct action instruction (the user 

tells the system what to do), whereas we consider instruction 

by specifying the  desired outcome (the user tells the system 

what to achieve, but not how to achieve it).  Consequently , we 

relate text to states instead of actions.  [14] , too, integrate s

natural language instruction , and  solve s multi -step tasks  with 

comparatively high -level instruction,  but  still  let s the user 

specify the solution strategy , rather than  stating  the goal to 

achieve. 

The use of vision -language models for success detection 

over visual states and text -based goal specifications were ex-

plored in  [15] . Success determination was used to provide 

reward signals for Reinforcement Learning agents. In contrast, 

we determine success not on the present state but on predicted 

future states to determine plan quality. 

III.  CONTRIBUTIONS 

1.  We propose a manipulation planning system that rea-

sons through sequences of affordances using fine -

grained visual state representations, while allowing in-

tuitive goal  specification  in text format. 

2.  We integrate a real -to -sim style -transfer approach to 

enable operation in a real -world setup. 

3.  We expand the prediction -based planning logic  of  [2] 

to enable planning with goals in which key objects be-

come fully occluded and/or stop being identifiable by 

their initial identifiers, by enriching state representa-

tions with object -tracking channels that keep track of 

objects named in the goal text. 

4.  We integrate  orthogonali sation  and virtual camera mo-

tion into the system ’s prediction module to improve 

generalisation over object layouts. 

IV.  TASK  ENVIRONMENT 

We start  by  expla ining  the task environment we use to train 

and evaluate the system.  We  expand the  tabletop manipulation 

environment  of  [2]  as illustrated in  Fig.  1 (left) . The scene  is 

built in  Unity  [16]  and  features a virtual UR5 robot arm (Uni-

versal Robotics), controlled using Unity -ROS infrastructure 

provided by the Unity Robotics Hub  [17] , and objects from the 

following categories: balls, cubes, cups, plates.  For data gen-

eration, o bject arrangements are generated randomly,  while for 

evaluation, arrangements are  designed manually  to create spe-

cific planning tasks.  For real -world experiments, we closely 

replicate the simulation environment in a physical setup  as 

shown in  Fig.  1 (right). 

We define the affordance  type  repertoire  𝒜  as 

{𝐺𝑅𝐴𝑆𝑃 , 𝑃𝐿𝐴𝐶𝐸 , 𝑃𝑈𝑆𝐻 , 𝐼𝑁𝑆𝐸𝑅𝑇 }. Each affordance is para-

metrised by a  pose consisting of  3D coordinates specifying the 

affordance ’s position in space, and a single angle specifying  a

gripper  orientation  in the XY plane.  𝐺𝑅𝐴𝑆𝑃  affordances  can 

exist on objects that fit within the open gripper in a down -

pointing pose, and on rims of upward -facing hollow objects 

(cups and plates). When the robot is holding an object,  𝑃𝐿𝐴𝐶𝐸 

affordances  can  exist on top of cubes and at  freely placed 

small  black markers on the table surface , and  𝐼𝑁𝑆𝐸𝑅𝑇  af-

fordances  can  exist  on upward -facing hollow objects.  𝑃𝑈𝑆𝐻 

affordances  can  exist on the outer surface of the top -down 

silhouette  of  an  object.  With regard to the gripper angle in the 

affordance parametrisation, we distinguish between objects 

that present  round top -down silhouettes  (balls, upright cups, 

plates) , and objects with  trapezoid  top -down silhouettes (cubes 

and toppled cups) . In t he former  case  the object  provide s no 

distinct privileged directions, so we place affordances at 0, 90, 

180, and 270 ° angles.  For the latter case, we determine which 

two of the of the three axes of the object ’s local coordinate 

system are least inclined from the work surface, project these   

> Fig. 1.Left: Simulated task environment (Unity). Right: Real -world
> task environment.

3

axes onto the XY plane, and place affordances in the corre-

sponding directions. This ensures that  e.g. cubes will be 

grasped  and pushed at  their faces , rather than at  precarious 

oblique angles .

Whether an affordance actually exists at a given  pose  is de-

termined programmatically during data generation (see be-

low), and  is  up for determination by the affordance recogni-

tion  NN  during manipulation planning. 

A. D ata Generation 

To generate data for training the system’s various modules, 

we generate random object layouts. Objects are generated pro-

grammatically with randomised parametrisation for size and 

shape features , within predefined ranges per object category .

For balls and cubes, we randomise a single size parameter. For 

cups and plates, we randomise top radius, bottom radius, and 

height.  All objects are generated  as  parametris ations of  a frus-

trum with  optional  curved sides and a n optional  top cavity. 

This allows generation of a  much  wide r variety of shapes, but 

we constrain the shape repertoire to the aforementioned set of 

recognisable objects, to facilitate text description  of objects  in 

other parts of the system. 

We procedurally detect the affordances that exist in each 

randomly generated scene.  During  data generation we have 

full access to object positions, so we can determine  the set of 

poses at which  affordances may exist.  We then apply the fol-

lowing checks to determine which of the potential affordances 

in this set do in fact exist. For  𝐺𝑅𝐴𝑆𝑃  affordances , we  plac e a

simplified  open gripper at  the candidate pose, and check for 

collisions with surrounding objects. For  𝑃𝐿𝐴𝐶𝐸 , we place a 

gripper holding the currently held object at the target pose, and 

check for collisions. For  𝐼𝑁𝑆𝐸𝑅𝑇 , we drop a small ball above 

the centre of the insertion target, and check whether it remains 

in contact with the target once its position has stabilised. If  the 

objects  remain in contact, we run the same check as for 

𝑃𝐿𝐴𝐶𝐸 . For push,  we place a half -open gripper at the starting 

pose for the pushing motion, and check for collisions. We then 

place the gripper and a copy of the target object  at  the end 

position of the push motion, and check for collisions again. In 

each case,  if the  relevant poses  are  collision free, the af-

fordance s are  deemed to exist. 

For each  random ly generated  object  layout , we  execute  a

sequence of up to  si x affordances , detecting  the  set of af-

fordances in each layout programmatically  and randomly se-

lecting affordances for execution . For each sequence, we store 

the object configuration at each step, the set of affordances 

detected  in each  layout , and the affordance actually executed 

at each step. The object  layout  here consists of the following: 

a top -down RGBD image of the scene, top -down depth images 

of each object rendered separately, and a list of centre coordi-

nates for each object in the scene. 

We render all objects using a  custom  shader that maps ob-

jects ’ surface normal vectors to RGB values. This  lets us  en-

code rich shape information into the visual appearance.  For 

purpose of generalisation over object rotation and translation 

in the effect prediction  NN , we want to be able to reposition 

the camera during neural processing of the state data. Specifi-

cally, we want to enable translation of the camera parallel to 

the camera plane, and rotation around its principal axis. Such 

rotations correspond straightforwardly to image rotations, but 

in the usual perspective projection, camera translations intro-

duce  parallax  changes that are not replicated by simple image 

translations. To avoid  changes in object appearance due to 

camera translation , we capture all state images in orthogonal 

projection , so that image translations correspond straightfor-

wardly to camera translations. 

V.  SYSTEM  ARCHITECTURE 

The  system is comprised of  the following  modules : the 

Goal  Interpretation  Module  (GIM) , the  Affordance  Recogni-

tion  Module  (ARM) , the  Effect  Prediction  Module  (EPM) , the 

Goal -Matching  Module  (GMM), and (for hardware experi-

ments) the Image Conversion Module (ICM).  Fig.  2 details the 

information flow between the modules  during planning.  Be-

low we explain the modules individually.  Additional infor-

mation about the a rchitecture s and  training procedure hyperpa-

rameter  settings  of  the NNs used in the various modules are 

given in  the  Appendix.  All  state images are processed in a 

resolution of 128 ×128.            

> Fig. 2.Global system architecture. ICM: Image Conversion Module. GIM: Goal Interpretation Module. ARM: Affordance Recognition
> Module. EPM: Effect Prediction Module. GMM: Goal Matching Module. 𝑻 applies and 𝑻 −𝟏 undoes view transformations. Plan search
> process branches at the selection of 𝒂 𝒊 from the list of available affordances 𝑨 𝒊 (marked “split ”).

4

A.  Goal -Interpretation Module (GIM) 

The GIM takes as input the initial state representation and 

the goal text provided by the user. It enriches the state repre-

sentation with object mask channels that identify the objects 

named in the goal text, and converts the goal text in to  a stand-

ardised format that relates the named objects to these mask 

channels. 

The  text -based goal definition format currently covers ob-

jects’ absolute  and  relative positions  (including  stackings ), and 

which object  (if any) is  being held by the robot . Table  1 details 

the goal text vocabulary . An example  of a possible  goal text is 

“[the small ball] is on the right of [the large cube]. [the large 

cube] is on the bottom left.”  The  named objects  in this goal 

text are  “the small ball”  and  “the  large cube ”. Goal text  𝑔  is 

standardi sed by replacing named objects with numbers:  “#1 is 

on the right of  #2.  #2 is on the bottom left.” . We denote the 

standardised goal text  as  𝑔 ̂ in  Fig.  2.

We  obtain  mask images  for the  named objects using a semi -

automated process. The user is presented with a view of the 

initial state, and asked to mark each named object with one or 

more points. We then employ SAM  [18]  to obtain  pixel -level 

binary -valued  object masks for the marked objects.  SAM  then 

produces three candidate masks per object.  We present the 

obtained candidate masks to the user and let them select the 

best candidate mask. In practice, this is  usually  the top candi-

date produced by SAM.  To  capture  occlusion  relations  in the 

input state, we  attenuate  the intensity of  the  mask  image from 

1 to 0.5 for pixels  where the object is present  but occluded. 

Object masks for objects renamed as #1, #2, #3 in the 

standardised goal text are concatenated in order to the RGBD 

state representation, creating an unambiguous correspondence 

between standardised object names and mask channels.  The 

number of mask channels is fixed at three. When there are 

fewer than three named objects, the remaining mask channels 

remain empty (i.e. all zero). We denote the resulting state  im-

age  format as  RGBDMMM , with  RGB denoting the colour 

channels, D the depth channel, and  each M indicating a mask 

channel. 

At present we rely on user input to relate object descriptions 

to objects, but this could likely be automated for  most  cases 

using well -established object recognition methods. 

B. Affordance Recognition Module ( AR M) 

This module is responsible for discovering the affordances 

that exist in a given scene.  Given an  RGBD image  of a world 

state, the module provides a list of affordances existing in that 

state.  Th e module is substantially the same as in  [2] . The im-

plementation is a modified  ScaledYOLOv4  [19]  network , re-

worked  to recogni se parametri sed affordances instead of ob-

jects.  The input image format  is extended  from YOLO ’s RGB 

to RGBD. YOLO ’s output originally consists of 2D bounding 

box coordinates along with the bounding boxes ’ width and 

height.  The modified network replaces  this  output  format  with 

affordance poses as described in Section  4 (i.e. 3D coordinates 

and a gripper angle). 

The module is trained  on  tuples of world states and af-

fordance lists from the dataset generated in section  4A , using 

the  ScaledYOLOv4  training procedure with minor  hyperpa-

rameter  modifications.  Training employs various types of 

augmentation  (see  Appendix) . We newly introduce  an  artifact 

augmentation . An artifact observed in some of our future state 

predictions are low -intensity leftovers of moved objects from 

previous states. To  robustify affordance recognition against 

such artifacts, we blend in preceding states at random low 

intensities  as an augmentation. 

C. Effect Prediction Module (EPM) 

This module is responsible for predicting the effects of the 

affordances found by the ARM.  Given a world state  𝑠 0 in 

RGBDMMM format  and a sequence of parametri sed  af-

fordances  𝑎 0:𝑛 −1, the prediction  module predicts the state se-

quence  𝑠 1:𝑛  that would result from executing sequence  𝑎 0:𝑛 −1

starting from state  𝑠 0. During planning, mask channels of the 

input state are populated with the masks provided by the  GIM .

During training, mask images of random subsets of the scene 

objects are used.  Prediction includes the mask channels, al-

lowing us to keep track of the named objects explicitly. Mask 

output captures occlusions in the same format as used in the 

input (i.e. 1 for present -and -visible, 0.5 for present -but -

occluded, 0 for absent). 

As noted above,  we do not assume a fixed set of objects, but 

a set of parametri sed object  classes . This dramatically increas-

es the shape variation of the objects encountered. Additional-

ly, object placement is far less constrained than i n [2] . We 

found that training effect prediction as in  [2]  quickly becomes 

infeasible in this case.  To enable prediction  of sufficient quali-

ty for planning  under the above conditions, we exploit the 

translational and rotational  invariance  of affordance effects. 

The local context in which an affordance is executed  can  af-

fect its outcome, but absolute position and rotation  in the  XY 

plane  do not. This allows us to predict the local effects of an 

affordance execution relative to a coordinate system posi-

tioned at the affordance’s  position  and orientation.  However, 

affordances also have effects that are best captured in  the ro-

bot ’s fixed  coordinate system. Specifically, grasping an object 

produces a state wherein the robot holds the object in a default 

holding pose. In this state, it is essential to consider the  visual 

characteristics of the  held object to determine the effect of 

subsequent  𝑃𝐿𝐴𝐶𝐸  and  𝐼𝑁𝑆𝐸𝑅𝑇  affordances. 

To  accommodate  prediction using  dual viewpoint s, we let 

the prediction module process states as follows. The state im-

age is split into a “robot view” (top part of the state image) 

and a “ table  view” (bottom part of the state image). Using the 

pose information from the affordance input, the  table  view is 

shifted and rotated such that the affordance is centred at the 

image centre  and oriented  at an angle of 0 . Because state im-

ages are represented in orthogonal projection, this transfor-

mation is equivalent to aligning the camera to the affordance ’s

XY coordinates. The robot view is left as -is.  To avoid loss of 

image content when recentring the table view, we pad the im-

age to 200 ×200.  The two resulting RGBDMMM images are 

concatenated along the channel dimension and processed as a 

14 -channel image.  We l et  𝑠 𝑖  

> 𝑗

denote the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ state in a sequence 

with its table view represented in the coordinate system of the 5

𝑗 𝑡 ℎ affordance. 

The NN at the core of the EPM expands  on  [2] . The net-

work consists of encoder  𝐸 , decoder  𝐷 , and predictors  𝑃 𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 ,

𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒  ∈ 𝒜 . Fig.  3 illustrates the input and output to each sub-

network, and the internal structure of  𝑃 𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 . Identical architec-

ture is used for each affordance type.  Letting  𝐸  encode  𝑠 𝑖 

> 𝑗

yields its latent representation  𝑐 𝑖  

> 𝑗

. Given  𝑐 𝑖  

> 𝑖

and affordance 

𝑎 𝑖  ∈ 𝑎 0:𝑛 −1of type  𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 , 𝑃 𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒  computes a latent state differ-

ential  𝛿 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

representing the predicted differential from state  𝑠 𝑖 

> 𝑖

to  𝑠 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

, and a memory trace  𝑚 𝑖  . 𝐷  decodes  𝛿 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

to a (14+2) -

channel image  ∆𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

, consisting of content for the 14 original 

channels and 2 channels (one per view) providing an  “update 

mask ” that determines how this content is combined with the 

content at the previous step. Given previous channel content 

ℎ𝑖 , new content  ℎ𝑖 +1, and update mask  𝑢 , the resulting channel 

content is given by  (1 − 𝑢 )ℎ𝑖  + 𝑢 ℎ𝑖 +𝑞  . The resulting 14 -

channel state image  𝑠 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

is the predicted state , with its table 

view represented in the coordinate system of the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ af-

fordance .

As  𝛿 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

is a latent representation, we cannot analytically 

apply shifts or rotations to the representation of the table view 

contained therein . For  𝑠 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

, however, we can. Hence, we can 

undo all shifts and rotations applied so far in order to construct 

single -view (7 -channel) scene representation  𝑠 𝑖 +1 . During 

planning, we construct  𝑠 𝑖 +1 and pass it to the recognition net-

work in order to obtain the list of affordances available there-

in, and to the goal matching module to quantify agreement 

with the planning goal. The single -view representation is also 

convenient for visualising predicted states for the user. If there 

is a subsequent affordance  𝑎 𝑖 +1 , we use the positional and 

rotational difference between  𝑎 𝑖  and  𝑎 𝑖 +1, to shift and rotate 

the table view of  𝑠 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

into the pose of  𝑎 𝑖 +1 to obtain  𝑠 𝑖 +1

> 𝑖 +1

, and 

continue the prediction process.  In  Fig.  2, 𝑇  and  𝑇 −1 indicate 

the application and undoing of viewpoint transformations  de-

scribed above . We use the PIX library in the JAX ecosystem 

to implement image rotations as part of the  EPM ’s computa-

tional graph,  so as to  allow training gradients to pass through 

the image rotations.  This makes it possible to train the EPM 

over sequential affordance executions despite the intervening 

image transformations. 

If there is a subsequent affordance in the sequence being 

processed, we carry the memory trace  𝑚 𝑖  through as input for 

the next prediction step. The memory trace allows for  reten-

tion  of information  about  delayed effects (i.e. effects not yet 

apparent in  𝑠 𝑖 +1 

> 𝑖

).  The initial memory trace  𝑚 𝑖  is initialised to 

all -zero.  We note that the experiments in the present work  are 

not designed to require consideration of such  effects. 

The effect prediction module is trained on the sequences of 

states and executed affordances from the dataset described in 

section  4A .

D. Goal -Matching Module (GMM) 

This  newly introduced  module is responsible for  quantify-

ing  the agreement of predicted states  with  the goal text.  Core 

of the module is a multi -modal NN  [20]  [15] . Its global archi-

tecture is  shown  in  Fig.  4. Input mixes image  and text  features, 

and output is a real value in the [0,1] range quantifying  text -

state  agreement.  The encoders and transformer derive from 

CLIP  [21] . The image encoder and transformer are scaled 

down and trained from scratch, while our text encoder is a 

fine -tuning of CLIP ’s text embedder. The MLP module is im-

plemented and trained from scratch. 

Input to the matching module is a  〈𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑠 , 𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 〉 tuple, 

Fig.  4. Architecture of the Goal -Matching Module (GMM) with an 

example of sentence tokenisation and processing. 

Table  1. Goal  sentence patterns .                   

> Pattern [count] Meaning
> {#m } is grasped.
> [47685] The robot is holding object #m .
> {#m } is on { #n }.
> [190168] Object #m is sitting on top of #n .
> {#m } is on the { row }
> {col }.
> [590351]
> Object #m is located in the indicated region of the
> work desk.
> row ∈{center, right, left}
> col ∈{middle, top, bottom}
> {#m } is
> {dir ection }{#n }.
> [1858014]
> Position of #m relative to #n .
> dir ection ∈{above, above left of, left of, below left
> of, below, below right of, right of, above right of}

Fig.  3. Architecture of the Effect Prediction Module (EPM). 6

where  𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘𝑠  consists of the mask channels of the  state im-

age, and  𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙  is  a list of sentences.  Given a goal sentence 

such as  “#1 is on #2 .”, e ach named object  #𝑖  is replaced with 

the mask  image  𝑣 𝑖  corresponding to  #𝑖  , and mapped to its 

latent embedding  using the image encoder . Remaining text 

elements of  𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙  are embedded  using the text encoder . The 

embeddings  are concatenated and processed using a Trans-

former  followed by an  MLP to obtain the  state -sentence 

agreement value.  When a goal text contains multiple sentenc-

es, we process each sentence separately, and take the mini-

mum over the resulting agreement values (high agreement 

with the full text should imply high agreement with all con-

stituent sentences). 

To produce training data for the GMM, we g enerat e sen-

tences from  the  object configuration data  explained  in section 

4A . Table  1 lists the sentence patterns generated, the number 

of examples obtained for each pattern, and the meaning of 

each sentence type. As is evident from  Table  1, the number of 

examples differs substantially per sentence pattern (up to a 

factor 39). To avoid detrimental effects of this skew on accu-

racy, we oversample from the rarer pattern types during batch 

generation  to equalise exposure to the sentence patterns. 

In addition to true state -sentence pairs, t raining  also  requires 

false  pairs . W e generate  false pairs in two ways. The first is to 

simply pair unrelated states and sentences. The second is to 

make small modifications to the sentence so as to render it 

untrue.  For example, a sentence such as  “#1 is on #2. ” may be 

rewritten  into  “#2 is on #1. ” to construct a false pair with the 

same elements as the original true pair. This promotes acquisi-

tion of the connections between grammatical and spatial rela-

tions. Finally, t o robustify  against imperfections in predicted 

state images, we  apply  blur and noise augmentations  to the 

state images. 

E. Image  Conversion  Module (ICM) 

The modules  discussed  above are sufficient for planning in 

the  simulated manipulation scene. However, for real -world 

operation we need one  additional  module.  Recall that t he 

modules comprising the planning system are trained on simu-

lation data. The use of simulation data allows us to easily vary 

object layouts and shape parametrisations. However, training 

on simulation data introduces a need to bridge the reality gap 

when we wish to perform real -world robotic manipulation 

using the trained system. For this purpose, we introduce  do-

main adaptation  by means of  image conversion . This is the 

role of the Image Conversion M odule  (ICM) .

Fig. 5  illustrates the concept. Core of the module is a neural 

network that takes an RGBD image from the real -world setup 

as input, and outputs an RGBD image of the same scene rep-

resented in the visual style of the simulation environment. We 

can then use this  sim -style  image as input to the sim -trained 

planning system. This circumvents the need to collect large 

amounts of real -world data for training the planning system. 

The network architecture used for the  ICM  is a Swin -Unet 

[22]  modified to process 4 -channel image data.  Before conver-

sion to sim -style, real world images are converted into orthog-

onal projection , in order to match the projection of simulation 

images  and  eliminate  dependence of  object s’ appearance  on 

the  camera ’s position in the  XY plane . The depth channel of 

the real -world image locates each pixel in 3D space, allowing 

us to remap the pixels into orthographic projection.  Re-

mapping will leave some pixels in the resulting image without 

content, in particular pixels on the workspace surface that are 

occluded by scene objects in perspective projection but not in 

orthographic projection. To fill in these pixels we prepare a 

background  RGBD  image of the real -world setup  without  any 

scene objects,  and convert it into orthogonal projection. Some 

scene objects can appear incomplete in the resulting image, 

but we find that the conversion network is capable of  inpaint-

ing  the missing parts during image conversion. 

Next we discuss data generation for training the ICM. We 

require pair s (𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  ∈ ℝ𝐻 ×𝑊 ×4, 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  ∈ ℝ𝐻 ×𝑊 ×4) of  real -style 

and  sim -style  images. The images marked  Real RGBD  and  Sim 

RGBD  in  Fig.  5 provide an example. We denote the RGB and 

D parts comprising these images as follows: 

𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  = [𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 

> 𝑅𝐺𝐵

, 𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  

> 𝐷

], 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  = [𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  

> 𝑅𝐺𝐵

, 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  

> 𝐷

].

The images in a pair should depict matching objects in 

matching poses. In other words, the images should differ in 

visual style only, while depicting the same scene content. Fur-

thermore, to enable the planning system to generalise over 

variation in objects’ visual appearance, it is desirable that  the 

real -style  images ( 𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  ) present objects in varied colours and 

materials.  However, collecting a large and varied set of physi-

cal objects for generating this data is costly and impractical. 

Here we  use  a pre -trained  generative model  to synthesise visu-

ally varied objects. 

Various methods for synthetic training image data have 

been proposed, such as  GenAug  [23]  and  Grasp Anything  [24] .

However, our use case imposes the constraint that the shape of 

the generated objects should closely match the shapes of the 

objects in  𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚 . To satisfy this constraint, we adopt  the combi-

nation of Stable Diffusion  [25]  with ControlNet  [26]  to per-

form  object image generation  conditioned on depth images. 

The pipeline for generating image pair data is illustrated in   

> Fig. 6. Pipeline for generating ICM training data.
> Fig. 5. Concept of domain adaptation via image conversion.

7

Fig. 6.  Associated with each image  𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚 in the  simulation da-

taset  is a set of  isolated depth images of  all  object s depicted in 

𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  . We map pairs of object depth image and text  prompts  to 

realistic synthetic RGB images  using ControlNet and Stable 

Diffusion . The depth image constrains the generated object to 

be  consistent in shape with the  object in simulation, and inclu-

sion of the object class name ( dish, cup, block, ball ) promotes 

visual consistency with the object type.  Variation in object 

appearance is obtained by including various colour and mate-

rial descriptors  (e.g.  red,  ceramic ) in the text prompts.  These 

descriptors are drawn randomly from a prepared list  of 30 

words . By scaling and pasting the resulting objects onto  the 

aforementioned  background image  at the same coordinates 

where the corresponding objects are located in  𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚  we  can 

synthesise a realistic  𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  

> 𝑅𝐺𝐵

with content matching  𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚 .

Synthesising  𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  

> 𝐷

is comparatively straightforward, as ob-

jects’ appearance in the depth channels is less variable. We 

synthesise  𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  

> 𝐷

by scaling and pasting the object depth images 

into  the  depth  channel of the background image . To improve 

robustness against noise and missing pixel data in real -world 

depth data, we apply Gaussian noise, smoothing, and random 

pixel  deletions. The above procedure lets us generate 

(𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  , 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚 ) pairs in a fully automated manner. 

To weed out low -quality examples , we add an additional 

quality control step. We found that occasionally, images are 

generated that do not match the description given in the 

prompt. Such examples may negatively affect ICM training. 

To eliminate such examples, we filter the generated data using 

a One -Class SVM  [27] , an unsupervised method for  identify-

ing  outliers . For each prompt used during data generation, we 

apply the One -Class SVM to the set of images generated using 

that prompt, and discard the examples that are classified as 

outliers . The proportion of outliers  (One -Class SVM  parame-

ter ν)  is set to 0.03.  For purpose of evaluation, we labelled the 

330 examples generated for the prompt “blue dish” by visual 

inspection.  Filtering reduced the proportion of invalid exam-

ples from 2.7%  to 0.9% , discarding 6/9 invalid examples and 

1/321 valid examples .

The composition of the  filtered  object dataset is shown in 

Table  2. Using this object data, we generate 100k  (𝐼 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙  , 𝐼 𝑠𝑖𝑚 )

pairs  as training data and another 10k pairs as validation data. 

We  then  train the ICM on  the resulting  dataset.  Data augmen-

tations used in ICM training are image translation and rota-

tion,  colour shifts, Gaussian noise, partial deletions,  and addi-

tion of artificial shadows using the Albumentations  [28]  li-

brary.  Furthermore, we rescale depth values to emphasise 

depth contrast in the range where scene objects reside. 

MODULE EVALUATIONS 

Before moving on to the planning logic and evaluation of 

the integrated planning system, we evaluate the  trained  system 

modules in isolation. 

A.  Affordance Recognition  Module Evaluation 

We let the ARM process all states in the test and training 

datasets, and check  how many of the ground truth affordances 

are recovered. We use  a confidence threshold of 0.5, and  tol-

erances of 2.5cm  for coordinates and 5 ° for angles when 

matching recognised affordances to ground truth affordances. 

Duplicate affordances in ARM output are filtered. Affordanc-

es that do not match any of the ground truth affordances are 

counted as  spurious  recognitions.  Table  3 reports the recogni-

RGB  #0 Mask  #1 Mask  #2 Mask 

Text  True/False  Similarity 

#0 is on #2.  True  0.897 

#0 is on #1.  False  0.018 

#2 is right of #1.  True  0.849 

#2 is left of #1.  False  0.019 

Fig.  7. Example of state -text  agreement quantification by the  goal 

matching module.  Note the half -intensity area in the #2 mask indicat-

ing where the object is present but occluded. 

Table  2. Composition of  object dataset for ICM training.         

> Object Type (view) Example count
> Cup (Top view) 6208
> Cup (Side view) 6024
> Cup (Bottom view) 7700
> Plate (Top view) 6632
> Ball 6122
> Block 6508

Table  3. Affordance recognition accuracy .                 

> Grasp Place Push Insert All Spurious
> Test 0. 92 0. 90 0. 86 0.91 0.9 02.8 /state
> Train 0.9 30.9 40.87 0. 89 0.9 12.6/state

Table  4. Prediction accuracy .                                                                

> Set Step All -area accuracy Changed area acc uracy
> Mean (std) Median Mean (std) Median
> Test
> 1.003 1(.00 22 ).0033 .042 (.0 44 ).031
> 2.00 52 (.00 50 ).0051 .04 9(.0 46 ).041
> 3.00 70 (.00 54 ).0064 .0 58 (.0 43 ).046
> 4.00 90 (.00 81 ).0077 .0 65 (.0 47 ).056
> 5.010 (.0075) .0091 .071 (.047) .061
> All .00 69 (.00 65) .0059 .0 57 (.0 47 ).045
> Train
> 1.0032 (.0028) .0033 .043 (.040) .031
> 2.0052 (.0044) .0051 .049 (.042) .041
> 3.0072 (.0057) .0066 .059 (.044) .048
> 4.0088 (.0064) .0080 .067 (.047) .058
> 5.010 (.0066) .0091 .070 (.046) .059
> All .0069 (.0059) .0061 .058 (.045) .046

Table  5. Goal matching accuracy.                   

> Sentence type Acc. Rec. Prec.
> {#m } is grasped. 1.00 1.00 1.00
> {#m } is on { #n }. 0.94 0.94 0.89
> {#m } is on the {row} { col }. 0.99 0.98 0.99
> {#m } is {direction} { #n }. 0.99 0.99 0.99
> Total 0.98 0.98 0.98

Table  6. Image conversion accuracy on synthetic data .           

> SSIM LPIPS L1 (all) L1 (objects)
> Test 0.9795 0.0153 1.0784 10.208
> Train 0.98 17 0.0026 0.9972 9.398

8

tion rate per affordances type and the mean number of spuri-

ous recognitions per state  image . Unsurprisingly, t he majority 

of recognition failures occur on edge cases, i.e. where the 

gripper can or cannot reach an object by a small margin.  Dur-

ing data generation, we use a mock gripper of somewhat in-

flated size to check for collisions with some additional leeway ,

so  false positives on edge cases are often in fact executable. 

B.  Effect Prediction Module Evaluation 

We evaluate the EPM in terms of the pixel -level error be-

tween predicted state images and ground truths ( Table  4). 

Note that any single action leaves most pixels unchanged.  Fol-

lowing  [2] , we also measure prediction error exclusively over 

the pixels that change from one state to the next. We observe 

mean pixel value errors of  0.0069  overall and  0.057  for 

changed pixels specifically. 

C.  Goal -Matching Module Evaluation 

Table  5 reports accuracy, recall and precision at a true/false 

threshold of 0.5 , over a test data set of size 25764, split evenly 

between positive and negative  examples.  Negative  examples 

are generated  in the same manner as during training . Fig. 7 

shows text -state agreement for various sentences on an exam-

ple state.  Overall accuracy is 98%. Most misclassifications 

occur on borderline cases, e.g. failure to recognise objects as 

stacked when their area of overlap is  very  small. 

D.  Image Conversion Module Evaluation 

We evaluate image conversion accuracy using  LPIPS 

(Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity , [29] ) and S SIM 

(Structural  Similarity  Index  Measure , [30] ) as our quality 

measures. Quantitative results on our synthetic dataset are 

reported in  Table  6. We observe generally good conversion 

quality  on synthetic data , although  thin object edges  can be 

challenging . Conversion results on images from the real -world 

setup  can be found in  the hardware experiments s ection  (7B ).

VI.  PLANNING  LOGIC 

Combining t he above modules make it possible to perform 

manipulation planning on basis of text -based goals.  Fig.  8

illustrates the process.  First an image of t he initial world state 

is obtained . For simulation experiments this is a  sim -style 

RGBD image in orthogonal projection. For real -world exper-

iments this is a  real -style  RGBD image in perspective projec-

tion. In the latter case, we apply perspective conversion fol-

lowed by style conversion using the ICM. Then we process the 

state image and goal text using the GIM to obtain masks for 

the named objects and the standardised goal text. 

The goal specification and initial  RGBDMMM  state are 

passed to a planning  manager  encapsulating the actual plan-

ning process. The initial state is passed on to the  ARM  and 

EPM . The former finds the list of available affordances in the 

current state, and passes the list to the  EPM . Using the initial 

state and the affordance list, the  EPM  predicts the future state 

for each affordance. 

These predictions are scored  for agreement with the goal 

specification  by the  GMM . Recall that in mask channels, pixel 

values of 0.0, 0.5 and 1.0 represent object absence, occluded 

presence, and unoccluded  presence. When forwarding predict-

ed states to the GMM, we round mask channel pixel values to 

multiples of 0.5, thereby eliminating blur around object edges 

and low -intensity artifacts.  Predictions are also  passed on to 

the  ARM  to find the affordances in those future states. This 

process of  recognition,  prediction,  and  scoring is repeated up 

to a  user -specified search depth. Finally, we return the se-

quence of affordances that produced the state prediction with 

the best goal agreement as our manipulation plan, along with a 

visualisation of this plan.  This plan may be shorter than the 

user -specified search depth. 

To  reduce computational cost, we  constrain  the planning 

process to meaningfully distinct branches of the search tree ,

by  apply ing  a simple pruning process on the child nodes ( pre-

dicted  states) that are expanded from each parent node. Differ-

ent affordances may produce qualitatively equivalent states. 

For example, grasping a cube at a 90 ° angle or a 270 ° angle 

will  in many cases  produce indistinguishable outcomes. 

Hence, for the set of child nodes expanded  from  each parent 

node, we measure the difference between the state predictions. 

If two predictions have fewer than 100 pixels differing by 

more than 0.15  on the RGB channels , we consider the states 

identical and discard  the  one  whose affordance  was recognised 

with  lower confidence.    

> Fig. 8. Information flow during planning (top to bottom) .ICM: Image Conversion Module. GIM: Goal Interpretation Module. ARM: Af-
> fordance Recognition Module. EPM: Effect Prediction Module. GMM: Goal Matching Module.

9

Task ID 

& goal 

1: [the plate] is on [the cube]. 

[the ball] is on [the cube]. 

2: [the left cup] is right of 

[the middle cup]. [the left 

cup] is left of [the right cup]. 

3: [the upper left cube] is 

above [the upper right cube]. 

[the upper right cube] is right 

of [the lower right cube]. 

4: [the cup] is on [the cube]. 

[the plate] is left of [the cu-

be]. 

5: [the plate] is left of [the 

cube]. [the ball] is left of [the 

cube]. 

Initial 

state 

Plan 

Result 

state 

Task ID 

& goal 

6: [the upper cube] is right of 

[the lower cube]. [the cup] is 

left of [the lower cube]. 

7: [the plate] is on the bottom 

right. [the ball] is on the 

bottom right. 

8: [the ball] is grasped. 

9: [the ball] is left of [the 

cup]. [the ball] is right of [the 

cube]. 

10: [the plate] is on [the right 

cup]. 

Initial 

state 

Plan 

Result 

state  Execution failure 

Fig.  9. Planning results for simulation experiments.  In each plan, states after the first are system -generated predictions.  Depth channel omitted. 

Right -side  column of each plan shows object mask channels (colourised to RGB to improve distinguishability).  See text for details. 10 

VII.  PLANNING  EXPERIMENTS 

We evaluate the integrated planning system on a set of 

planning tasks designed to test the system ’s ability to handle 

various challenges.  Note that t he  planning process  is fully de-

terministic  (repeat runs with the same goal and initial state 

produce identical  plans ). We  let  the virtual UR5  execute the 

generated plans,  using MoveIt  [31]  to generate joint trajecto-

ries for the gripper coordinates specified in the plan.  Table  7

provides a specification of the  system configuration (hardware 

and software)  used for plan generation. 

A. Simulation Experiments 

Fig.  9 shows initial states, goals, generated plans , and ob-

tained result states  for  our set of  10  simulation tasks.  In each 

plan, the s tate images beyond the first are predictions  generat-

ed by the EPM . Mask channels corresponding to objects #1, 

#2, and #3 are coloured in red, green and blue for ease of dis-

tinction.  The depth channel is omitted due to space constraints. 

Explanatory markers and text (white) are edited in manually. 

Letters in initial and result state s are added to distinguish visu-

ally identical objects, and are not visible to the planning sys-

tem.  Recall that small black markers on the table surface indi-

cate placement positions.  We briefly explain the thinking be-

hind the task designs below. 

Task 1: The goal here is to position both the ball and the 

plate on the cube. The stacking order for the ball and plate is 

not specified, and the ball is already on the cube. A  naïve 

planner might fail by trying to place the plate on the ball. The 

correct solution is to move the ball onto the plate, and then 

move the plate -ball compound onto the cube. This requires 

temporarily undoing a goal condition (ball -on -cube) that holds 

in the initial state, exploitation of the effect that a n object  on a 

plate moves along with that plate, and retention of the position 

of the cube as it becomes occluded by the plate (to match the 

solution state to the goal). 

Task 2:  For a lack of placement positions  (black markers) 

on the table surface, cups can only be placed on plates  here .

To satisfy the goal text, cup A must be placed on the middle 

plate, and cup B must be placed on the left plate. However, the 

left plate is initially occupied by cup A, so  the choice of cup to 

grasp first must be informed by foresight of the subsequently 

available PLACE affordances .

Task 3: This block -pushing puzzle admits exactly one valid 

order of push actions. 

Task 4: The goal specifie s target positions for the cup and 

plate relative to the block. The cup (which is large relative to 

the block) must be on top of the block, which implies that the 

block ends up fully occluded when the goal is satisfied. 

Hence, recognising that the goal is satisfied requires the sys-

tem to keep track of the whereabouts of a fully occluded ob-

ject , and assess positions of other objects relative to the oc-

cluded object. 

Task  5:  The goal requires both the ball and the plate to be to 

the left of the block, and there are two placement positions to 

the left of the block. However, the sizes of the objects and the 

close proximity of the placement positions to the block make 

it impossible to place the plate to the left of the block without 

colliding with it . T he ball , however, could be placed. The so-

lution is to satisfy the goal  not by moving the ball and the 

plate but  by  instead moving the block  to the right of the other 

objects. 

Task 6:  A specific alignment of objects must be obtained in 

absence of placement positions on the table surface. Our in-

tended solution here was to push  the lower  cube to the left, 

then push the cup off to the left, then push  the upper  cube 

down. However, the system invented a different, unintended 

solution, exploiting the fact that  the upper  cube can be brought 

to the right of  the lower  cube by placing it on  the upper cube 

and then pushing it off to the right.  This strategy may have 

worked, but the initial push affordance is position ed  too low in 

the Z dimension, leading to execution failure. Note that the 

state predictions for this task are quite fuzzy. This is likely due 

to the fact that t he effect of pushing an object off the top of 

another object is somewhat stochastic. 

Task 7: This task requires both the ball and the plate to be 

positioned on the lower right of the table. The ball already 

satisfie s this requirement in the initial state, but also obstructs 

the plate from being pushed to or placed in the target area. 

Similar to task 1, the solution requires temporary undoing of a 

goal condition and exploitation of the effect that an object on a 

plate moves along with that plate. 

Task 8:  This task is cleared by grasping the ball, but the 

gripper ’s access to the ball is obstructed by the surrounding 

cups.  Solving this task requires consideration of how af-

fordance executions affect availability of future affordances: 

to  reveal a GRASP affordance on the ball, two cups  on oppos-

ing sides  of the cup must be pushed aside , such that both fin-

gers of the gripper can reach the ball .

Task 9: Solving this task requires exploitation of the fact 

that objects can be brought side -by -side by placing one on top 

of another and then pushing the top one off. The choice of the 

bottom object is important here : both the block and the cup are 

in viable positions, but placing the ball in the cup would make 

it impossible to push the ball off. 

Task 10: The plate should be brought on top of the cup stand-

ing on top of it. This requires moving the cup on the table sur-

face ( onto  one of the placement  markers ), and setting the plate 

on top of it. The additional catch here is that there is a second 

cup standing near one of the placement positions, that is taller 

than the right cup. The right cup could be placed there, but the 

taller cup would prevent plac ement of  the plate on top of the 

right  cup there.  Hence the correct choice of placement position 

requires some  foresight . Additionally, the right cup will neces-

sarily be fully occluded in any state satisfying the goal, so in           

> Table 7. System configuration .
> CPU AMD EPYC7702P (64 Core / 2.0 GHz)
> GPU NVIDIA H100 80GB
> RAM 512GB
> ROS ROS1 Noetic
> Unity 2021.3.38f1
> RGBD Camera Azure Kinect
> Arm Universal Robots UR5 (simulation)
> DOBOT CRA5 (hardware)
> Gripper Robotiq 2F -140

11 

this task too, tracking the whereabouts of an occluded object is 

essential. 

We see that the system generates sensible plans for  9 out of 

our 10  tasks, successfully avoiding our various traps. 

B. Real -world Experiments 

Next, we perform a similar set of experiments using our re-

al -world  recreation  of the experimental setup ( Fig.  1, right 

panel).  In this setup, the ICM comes into play, converting real -

world images into sim -style images and enabling generalisa-

tion over object colours and textures.  As the real -world con-

text increases stochastic elements, w e run  5 trials per task. 

Table 8  reports success rates per task.  Half of the tasks are 

solved consistently.  For tasks with at least one  successful  trial, 

Fig.  10  shows the initial, converted, and outcome states for 

one trial.  Note the varied appearance of the scene objects. The 

ICM  maps visually varied objects to a consistent  appearance 

matching the simulation environment. 

Failure patterns are as follows. T he ICM struggles  with 

some  cases where objects are stacked in the initial real -world 

state, leading to  consistent  failure on tasks  1 and 6 . In task 3 

and 10 , we  varied the position of the cup on the plate. We see 

prediction failures  for cup grasping actions when the  cup is 

positioned  out -of -centre on  a plate in the initial state. Our data 

generation system produces configuration s with stacked ob-

jects, but the top object in such configurations is almost al-

ways centred on the bottom object. Hence, out -of -centre states 

are unfamiliar  territory . In task 8, the  ARM erroneously rec-

ognises the ball as graspable after moving just one cup out of 

the way. 

VIII.  DISCUSSION  & CONCLUSION 

Our experiments show that the system is capable of solving 

tasks requiring multi -step foresight,  “detouring ” (temporarily 

undoing  already -satisfied goal conditions), consideration of 

secondary affordance effects (e.g. if object A is on B, A 

moves with B), and extensive occlusion.  Domain adaptation 

lets us transfer  these abilities to  real -world objects of varied 

appearance . However, we did observe  a notable  drop in suc-

cess rates  on real -world experiments .

The full system combines a number of different modules, 

which  we re trained  separately in the present work . As dis-

cussed in Section 5 and the appendix, we apply various forms 

of data augmentation to improve each module ’s robustness to 

imperfections in the data produced by the module feeding it, 

but  it is difficult to fully cover the characteristic imperfections 

of each module.  The EPM, for example, is trained on simula-

tion data, but in hardware experiments it has to process images 

produced by the ICM , which contain noise and artifacts not 

fully covered by the various augmentations applied during 

EPM training.  Reduced prediction accuracy on converted im-

ages was a major contributor to failures on real -world tasks. 

We expect that improvements could be obtained by training 

each module on data that has been  passed  through its feeding 

module . We did not pursue this strategy here, however, as it 

would  incur extensive additional data processing and impose a 

fixed order on the training processes of the various modules .

Another open issue is p lanning time cost . In  [2] , planning 

time  costs  were on the order of  a few seconds, but  the present 

system  is significantly slower , taking between  ten s of seconds 

to a few minutes  per task . The introduction of a multimodal 

NN for goal matching ( replacing the  sliding window image 

region matching  employed in  [2] ) adds substantial computa-

tional cost , and  the use of a dynamic viewpoint in prediction 

incurs some additional computational costs as well.  Another 

speed -limiting factor in our present implementation is the mix-

ing of frameworks.  Most modules are built on existing code 

bases, which were in turn built on different frameworks. The 

ARM, GMM, and ICM are implemented in PyTorch  [32] ,

whereas the EPM and additional processing in the planning 

process are implemented in JAX  [33] . This  results in  frequent 

data format conversions and data transfers between CPU and 

Task ID  2 3 4 5 7 9

Initial 

state 

Converted 

state 

Outcome 

state                             

> Fig. 10 . Results of hardware experiments .Depth channel omitted. The second row shows initial states converted to sim -style using the ICM.
> Table 8.Success rates per task in hardware experiments .
> Task 12345678910
> Success rate 0/5 5/5 5/5 1/5 5/5 0/5 5/5 0/5 5/5 0/5

12 

GPU that could be avoided in a single -framework implemen-

tation. 

As noted in the introduction, and closely related to the issue 

of  time efficiency, h uman planning  combines  a sub -symbolic 

understanding of real -world dynamics with  symbolic reason-

ing.  We focused here on the  former , but  hybridisation with the 

latter could greatly improve planning efficiency . Symbolic 

reasoning facilitates efficient search for candidate plans, while 

sub -symbolic reasoning allows for verification of candidate 

plans at fine granularity, and for broad  “outside the box ” plan 

search when symbolic search fail  to produce a viable plan (cf. 

“non -canonical affordance effects ” in  [2] ). Furthermore,  it 

may  be  possible  to  acqui re  symbolic rules  by  discover ing  con-

sistent patterns in learned sub -symbolic dynamics . Explor ing 

the potential of fine -grained prediction as  a substrate for  the 

grounding and  discovery  of symbolic rules  remains as future 

work. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  J. J. Gibson, The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems, Boston, 

USA: Houghton Mifflin, 1966. 

[2]  S. Arnold, M. Kuroishi, R. Karashima, T. Adachi and K. Yamazaki, 

"Recognising Affordances in Predicted Futures to Plan With 

Consideration of Non -Canonical Affordance Effects,"  IEEE Robotics 

and Automation Letters,  vol. 8, pp. 1455 -1462, 2023. 

[3]  E. Ugur and J. Piater, "Bottom -up learning of object categories, 

action effects and logical rules: From continuous manipulative 

exploration to symbolic planning," in  2015 IEEE International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2015. 

[4]  E. Ugur and J. Piater, "Refining discovered symbols with multi -step 

interaction experience," in  2015 IEEE -RAS 15th International 

Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) , 2015. 

[5]  E. Erdemir, C. B. Frankel, K. Kawamura, S. M. Gordon, S. Thornton 

and B. Ulutas, "Towards a cognitive robot that uses internal rehearsal 

to learn affordance relations," in  2008 IEEE/RSJ International 

Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , 2008. 

[6]  T. Girgin and E. Uğur, "Multi -Object Graph Affordance Network: 

Goal -Oriented Planning through Learned Compound Object 

Affordances,"  IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental 

Systems,  pp. 1 -12, 2024. 

[7]  A. Lerer, S. Gross and R. Fergus, "Learning Physical Intuition of 

Block Towers by Example," in  Proceedings of The 33rd International 

Conference on Machine Learning , New York, New York, USA, 

2016. 

[8]  D. Xu, A. Mandlekar, R. Martín -Martín, Y. Zhu, S. Savarese and L. 

Fei -Fei, "Deep Affordance Foresight: Planning Through What Can 

Be Done in the Future," in  2021 IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2021. 

[9]  H. Aktas, U. Bozdogan and E. Ugur, “Multi -step planning with 

learned effects of partial action executions,”  Advanced Robotics,  vol. 

38, no. 8, pp. 562 -576, 2024. 

[10]  C. Wang, D. Xu and L. Fei -Fei, "Generalizable Task Planning 

Through Representation Pretraining,"  IEEE Robotics and Automation 

Letters,  vol. 7, pp. 8299 -8306, 2022. 

[11]  J. Liang, M. Sharma, A. L. LaGrassa, S. Vats, S. Saxena and O. 

Kroemer, "Search -Based Task Planning with Learned Skill Effect 

Models for Lifelong Robotic Manipulation,"  2022 International 

Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),  pp. 6351 -6357, 

2021. 

[12]  H. Yamada, T. Motoda, T. Nishi, W. Wan and K. Harada, "Toridashi 

konnan na misshuujoutai kara no hajisenryaku no jidouseisei 

(Automatic generation of grasping strategy for picking in challenging 

crowded states)," in  Proceedings of the 42rd Annual Conference of 

the RSJ (RSJ2024) , 2024. 

[13]  M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli and D. Fox, "CLIPort: What and Where 

Pathways for Robotic Manipulation," in  Proceedings of the 5th 

Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2021. 

[14]  H. Kim, Y.  -J. Song, M. Lee and B.  -T. Zhang, “One -Shot 3 -D

Affordance Learning for Multi -Stage Robotic Manipulation,”  IEEE 

Access,  vol. 14, 2026. 

[15]  Y. Du, K. Konyushkova, M. Denil, A. Raju, J. Landon, F. Hill, N. de 

Freitas and S. Cabi, "Vision -Language Models as Success Detectors," 

in  Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Lifelong Learning Agents ,

2023. 

[16]  A. Juliani, V. -P. Berges, E. Vckay, Y. Gao, H. Henry, M. Mattar and 

D. Lange, "Unity: A General Platform for Intelligent Agents,"  CoRR, 

vol. abs/1809.02627, 2018. 

[17]  "Unity robotics hub," 2020. 

[18]  A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. 

Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W. -Y. Lo, P. Dollár and R. Girshick, 

"Segment Anything,"  arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02643,  2023. 

[19]  C. -Y. Wang, A. Bochkovskiy and H. -Y. M. Liao, "Scaled -YOLOv4: 

Scaling Cross Stage Partial Network," in  2021 IEEE/CVF Conference 

on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Los Alamitos, 

CA, USA, 2021. 

[20]  H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu and Y. J. Lee, "Visual Instruction Tuning," in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. 

[21]  A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, 

G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger and I. 

Sutskever, "Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural 

Language Supervision," in  International Conference on Machine 

Learning , 2021. 

[22]  H. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Tian and M. Wang, 

"Swin -Unet: Unet -Like Pure Transformer for  Medical Image 

Segmentation," in  Computer Vision  – ECCV 2022 Workshops , Cham, 

2023. 

[23]  Z. Chen, S. Kiami, A. Gupta and V. Kumar, "GenAug: Retargeting 

behaviors to unseen situations via Generative Augmentation,"  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2302.06671,  2023. 

[24]  A. D. Vuong, M. N. Vu, H. Le, B. Huang, H. T. T. Binh, T. Vo, A. 

Kugi and A. Nguyen, "Grasp -Anything: Large -scale Grasp Dataset 

from Foundation Models," in  2024 IEEE International Conference on 

Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. 

[25]  R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser and B. Ommer, 

"High -Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models," in 

2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR) , Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2022. 

[26]  L. Zhang, A. Rao and M. Agrawala, "Adding Conditional Control to 

Text -to -Image Diffusion Models," in  2023 IEEE/CVF International 

Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. 

[27]  B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe -Taylor, A. J. Smola and R. C. 

Williamson, "Estimating the Support of a High -Dimensional 

Distribution,"  Neural Computation,  vol. 13, pp. 1443 -1471, 2001. 

[28]  A. Buslaev, V. I. Iglovikov, E. Khvedchenya, A. Parinov, M. 

Druzhinin and A. A. Kalinin, "Albumentations: Fast and Flexible 

Image Augmentations,"  Information,  vol. 11, 2020. 

[29]  R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman and O. Wang, "The 

Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric," 

in  2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR) , 2018. 

[30]  Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh and E. P. Simoncelli, "Image 

quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity," 

IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,  vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600  -

612, 2004. 

[31]  D. Coleman, I. A.  Șucan, S. Chitta and N. Correll, "Reducing the 

Barrier to Entry of Complex Robotic Software: a MoveIt! Case 13          

> Study," Journal of Software Engineering for Robotics, 5(1):3 –16, vol.
> 5, pp. 3 -16, May 2014.
> [32] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T.
> Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E.
> Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
> L. Fang, J. Bai and S. Chintala, "PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High -
> Performance Deep Learning Library," in Advances in Neural
> Information Processing Systems 32 , Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, p.
> 8024 –8035.
> [33] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D.
> Maclaurin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman -
> Milne and Q. Zhang, "JAX: composable transformations of
> Python+NumPy programs," 2018.
> [34] J. Bernstein, Y. -X. Wang, K. Azizzadenesheli and A. Anandkumar,
> "signSGD: compressed optimisation for non -convex problems," 2018.
> [35] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, "Gaussian Error Linear Units
> (GELUs)," arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.

APPENDIX 

Here  we specify the  architectures and  hyperparameters  of 

the neural network architectures used in the various modules 

of the planning system. 

A. Affordance Recognition Module  (ARM) 

The affordance recognition network is a modification of 

ScaledYOLOv4  [19]  with the architecture given in  Table  9.

The architecture was adjusted to produce a finer grid of candi-

date recognitions than the original settings, because we may 

need to recognise multiple exemplars of the same affordance 

type in close proximity. 

Table  9. Affordance Recognition Network .

# Layer type  Channels, kernel, 

stride, upscale 

Input 

layer(s) 

> backbone

1 conv.  3→16, 3, 1,  -

2 conv., 1xCSP  32, 3, 2,  - 1

3 conv., 2xCSP  64, 3, 2,  - 2

4 conv., 8xCSP  128, 3, 2,  - 3

5 conv., 8xCSP  256, 3, 2,  - 4

6 conv., 4xCSP  512, 3, 2,  - 5

> Head

7 CSPSPP  256  6

8a  conv.  128, 1,  -, - 5

8b  conv.  128, 1,  -, - 7

9 concat., 2x rCSP  128  8a, 8b 

10a  conv.  64, 1,  -, 2  4

10b  conv.  64, 1,  -, 4  9

11  concat., 2x rCSP  128  10a, 10b 

12  conv.  128, 3,  -, - 11 

13  detection  - 12 

We replace the bounding box width and height outputs with 

a single affordance angle output , using 8 equally spaced an-

chor values . Angles are normalised to the  [0, 1) range.  We 

define the angle loss as follows: 

𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒  = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 (𝑑 , 1 − 𝑑 )

𝑑  = (𝑎 ̂ − 𝑎 ) 𝑚𝑜𝑑  1

where  𝑎  is the ground truth angle and  𝑎 ̂ the value given by 

the network.  Other loss definitions follow ScaledYOLOv4. 

ARM training employs the following data augmentations: 

1.  Shift augmentation: we apply random shifts of  -8 to +8 

pixels along the X and Y axes, with corresponding ad-

justments in affordance coordinates. 

2.  Noise augmentation: we apply uniform noise from 

range  [−𝑟 , 𝑟 ], where  𝑟  is drawn randomly per example 

from  [0,10 ], and clip the result to  [0,255 ].

3.  Artifact augmentation: we blend the state image with 

the previous state image from the same data sequence 

at a random intensity drawn per pixel from  [0, 0.25 ).

B. Effect Prediction Module  (EPM) 

Table  10  specifies the architecture for the EPM , which is 

based on the prediction network of our previous work  [2] . One 

pass through this architecture corresponds to prediction for 

one affordance. Separate instances of the  𝑃  submodule are 

used for different affordance types. 

Table  10 . Effect Prediction Network Hyperparameters .

Layer #  Details  Activation 

E

1 conv.  Channels:  14  → 8

Kernel:  3 × 3

Stride:  2 × 2

𝑡𝑎𝑛 ℎ(𝑥 )

2 conv.  Channels:  8 → 8

Kernel:  3 × 3

Stride:  2 × 2

3 linear  8192  → 8192 

4 linear  8192  → 4096 

5 linear  4096  → 256 

- Local response normalisation 

P

1~8  4 × Mixed connectivity block 

(B in  Fig.  3) 𝑡𝑎𝑛 ℎ(𝑥 )

- Local response normalisation 

D

1 linear  8192  → 8192 

𝑡𝑎𝑛 ℎ(𝑥 )

2 linear  8192  → 4096 

3 linear  4096  → 256 

4 conv.  Upscale:  2 × 2

Channels:  8 → (14  + 2)

Kernel:  3 × 3

5 conv.  Upscale:  2 × 2

Channels:  8 → 8

Kernel:  3 × 3

𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝 (𝑥 , 0, 1)

Local response normalisation  refers to the  following  sim-

plified normalisation :

𝐿𝑅𝑁 (𝑥 ) = 𝑥 

√‖𝑥 2‖1

The training loss  consists of separate components  for 

RGBD channels and mask channels.  The RGBD loss 

𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝐺𝐵𝐷  is simply the mean squared error over prediction and 

ground truth, averaged over all states in the sequence.  Mask 

channels are dominated by zero values, making mask predic-

tion prone to falling into the local minimum of prediction  ze-

roes exclusively . To focus the loss on  changes  in the mask 14 

channels, we multiply per -pixel loss for pixels that have 

changed relative to the preceding state by  𝑤 𝑐 ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑑  , and loss 

for pixels that stayed the same by by  𝑤 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑒  , where: 

𝑤 𝑐 ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑑  = 𝑏 

𝑑  , 𝑤 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑒  = 1 − 𝑏 

1 − 𝑑 ,

with  𝑏  = 0.1 and  𝑑  the proportion of changed mask -channel 

pixels between the state and its preceding state. 

We train the network using the  signSGD  [34]  loss, with  an 

adaptively decreasing  learning  rate  initialised to  5 × 10 −5. We 

evaluate  accuracy  on the validation set every 10k iterations, 

and when  accuracy fails to improve for 5 evaluations in a row, 

the learning rate is reduced by a factor 2.  Training is terminat-

ed when the learning rate falls below  10 −10 .

EPM training employs the following data augmentations: 

1.  Mirroring of all states and affordances in a sequence. 

2.  Affordance position & angle noise 

3.  Rotating affordance angles by 180 ° for affordances 

where this produces identical outcomes. 

4.  Blacking out random patches of the input state areas 

that remain constant over the state sequence. 

C. Goal Matching Module  (GMM) 

The GMM reuses parts of the CLIP  [21]  architecture, albeit 

in a different configuration and scaled down somewhat.  Table 

11  specifies the architecture.  

> Table 11 . Goal Matching Network Hyperparameters .

Image encoder  Activation 

1x 2D 

convolution 

Kernel: 32x32 

Input channels: 1 

Output channels: 768  𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 

[35] 8x Residual 

Attention 

Heads: 16 

Output dim: 512 

2x Linear  Dims: 512 →512 

Transformer 

8x Residual 

Attention 

Heads: 16 

Output dim: 512  𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 

MLP 

3x Linear  Dims: 512 →256 →128 →1 𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 

The goal matching network is trained using the following 

loss: 

𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠  = 1

𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ

∑ 𝛼  ∙ (1 − 𝑒 𝑙 𝑖  )𝛾  ∙ 𝑙 𝑖 

> 𝑖 =𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ
> 𝑖 =1

𝑙 𝑖  = 𝑦 𝑖  ∙ log  𝜎 (𝑥 𝑖  ) + (1 + 𝑦 𝑖  ) ∙ log (1 − 𝜎 (𝑥 𝑖 ))

where  𝑥 𝑖  and  𝑦 𝑖  are the output and ground truth for the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ

example in the batch, batch size  𝑛 𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐 ℎ = 16 , 𝛼  = 1, and  𝛾  =

2. The network is trained using the Adam optimiser with hy-

perparameters  𝛽 1 = 0.9, 𝛽 2 = 0.99 , 𝜀  = 10 −7 , and a weight 

decay of  10 −7 . We use a cosine learning rate schedule that 

starts at  10 −7, gradually increases to  10 −5 over the first epoch, 

and then gradually decays again.  We train for 50 epochs in 

total. 

D. Image Conversion Module  (ICM) 

The ICM adopts the Swin -Unet architecture  [22]  as -is, ex-

cept for  an increase in input and output channels from 3 to 4, 

in order to accommodate the depth channel of our RGBD im-

agery. The net is trained using the Adam optimiser with hy-

perparameters  𝛽 1 = 0.9, 𝛽 2 = 0.999 , 𝜀  = 10 −8, weight decay 

of  0, and a fixed learning rate of  10 −4. We train for 50 epochs 

with a batch size of 16.