Title: VIA: Visual Interface Agent for Robot Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11119v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:02:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# VIA: V ISUAL INTERFACE AGENT FOR ROBOT CONTROL 

Hengyuan Hu, Priya Sundaresan, Jensen Gao, Dorsa Sadigh 

Stanford University 

# ABSTRACT 

Robot manipulation is a complex task that requires visual understanding, physical reasoning, planning, and closed-loop control. General-purpose foundation mod-els (FMs) have grown remarkably capable of some of these, especially vision and reasoning. To leverage this for generalist robot policies, current methods typi-cally involve converting existing FMs into vision-language-action (VLA) models by fine-tuning on robot data to output low-level actions. However, VLAs are often orders of magnitude smaller than frontier FMs given the limited data and compute available for fine-tuning, which in turn limits their general capability. Inspired by the growing ability of FMs to operate software through visual interfaces, we ask whether that same competence suffices to control a robot. We present VIA ( Visual 

Interface Agent for robot control), a framework that recasts robot control as an agentic task: an off-the-shelf FM-powered agent drives a manipulator through a browser-based 3D interface by taking screenshots, issuing intuitive commands, observing the outcome, and adjusting. The agent receives no robot-specific fine-tuning and no access to privileged state information: it perceives visual input and acts through a small set of general tools. VIA inherits the agent’s general reason-ing, closed-loop error recovery, and ability to plan and re-plan from what it ob-serves. It solves a diverse suite of tabletop manipulation tasks zero-shot with both Claude Code and Codex. With the strongest model (Fable 5) it achieves 96 .7%

success on three LIBERO-Goal tasks and 100 % on a long-horizon rainbow as-sembly task. Performance improves with the scale and strength of the underlying model. These results suggest that frontier agents already possess skills that trans-fer directly to robot control given the right interface: your coding or computer-use agent is, in a sense, secretly a robot-control agent .

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

General robot manipulation is a long-standing research goal at the intersection of robotics and learn-ing. It requires policies that are capable of complex visual understanding, physical reasoning, long-term planning, and precise closed-loop control. Foundation models (FMs) (Radford et al., 2019; Bommasani et al., 2021; OpenAI, 2023) trained on internet-scale data have become remarkably ca-pable of several of these, such as visual perception and reasoning, which has made leveraging them for robotic manipulation highly attractive. One approach for this is to convert existing vision-language models into vision-language-action (VLA) models, by fine-tuning them on robot data to produce low-level actions (Zitkovich et al., 2023; Black et al., 2025). However, due to a lack of both compute and robot-specific data, VLAs are often orders of magnitude smaller than frontier FMs. This gap has a profound impact on capabilities, particularly the physical reasoning and long-horizon planning skills that current robot policies lack. Another paradigm is Code-as-Policies (CaP) (Liang et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2023), where FMs are prompted to generate programs that call perception APIs and hand-crafted skill primitives, e.g., mask = segment_text_prompt("green cube") , grasp_pose = sample_grasp_pose("red cube") (Fu et al., 2026). Although this is a natural way to tap into the strong coding capabilities of FMs, the FM usually does not perceive the scene directly, and the system is often bottlenecked by human-crafted abstractions rather than by the FM. Fu et al. (2026) find that CaP, even when built on state-of-the-art FMs, remains dependent on these abstractions, as success rates degrade sharply when the high-level primitives are replaced by low-level ones. 

> Correspondence to hengyuan.hhu@gmail.com

1arXiv:2607.11119v1 [cs.RO] 13 Jul 2026 Agent                                     

> any off-the-shelf agent no robot-specific fine-tuning no privileged state
> screenshot gripper_teleport_via_click rotate_gripper execute_waypoint
> Web UI —3D scene reconstructed from RGB-D
> Robot Control UI
> target gripper
> Robot Environment
> RGB-D cameras simulation ·real robot
> OBSERVE
> via MCP tools
> ACT
> via MCP tools
> STREAM
> RGB-D
> EXECUTE
> via controller
> multi-round loop ·until end_episode the same interface ahuman uses

Figure 1: VIA overview: an off-the-shelf agent controls a robot through a browser-based 3D inter-face. The interface includes a 3D point-cloud scene reconstructed from RGB-D cameras, as well as raw third-person and wrist camera feeds. The agent observes and acts through human-legible MCP tools: e.g., it can take screenshots and control poses by setting virtual target grippers as waypoints. Once satisfied with the target gripper pose, the agent invokes a simple controller to move the real gripper to it. The agent repeats this observe-act loop, re-planning from each new observation, and completing the task through a sequence of waypoints. We propose a new way to connect FMs to robot manipulation: recasting robot control as a visual tool-use task for agents, similar to general computer use. Agents (Yao et al., 2023) wrap FMs with harnesses to enable better performance on long-horizon tasks (Yang et al., 2024; Jimenez et al., 2024), as well as closed-loop control of software or games in virtual environments (Anthropic, 2025a). Frontier agents can now operate real software through native screenshots, clicking, and key-board operations (Shi et al., 2017; Anthropic, 2024a; OpenAI, 2025b). They perform long-horizon tasks in a closed-loop manner, iteratively observing, planning, and executing, remarkably similar to what we want from robot policies. Therefore, we ask: given the right visual interface and human-legible tools, can a state-of-the-art agent control a robot without any robot-specific adaptation? We present VIA ( Visual Interface Agent), a framework for robot control that lets any off-the-shelf visual agent drive a robot manipulator through a browser-based 3D interface (Fig. 1). The interface renders a 3D point cloud of the scene reconstructed from RGB-D cameras, alongside third-person and wrist camera feeds. The agent perceives the scene solely by taking screenshots of this interface, with no access to privileged state. It reasons about what it sees and issues intuitive commands through a small set of human-legible Model Context Protocol (MCP) tools (Anthropic, 2024b). These tools pose a virtual target gripper , much as a human would pose an object in 3D design software such as Blender, to serve as a waypoint for the robot to achieve. Once satisfied with this waypoint, the agent calls a simple controller that brings the real gripper to it. VIA repeats this observe-act loop, checking outcomes and correcting errors, until the task is complete. We evaluate VIA with two popular agents, Claude Code (CC) (Anthropic, 2025b) and Codex (Ope-nAI, 2025a), on a suite of six tabletop manipulation tasks that span pick-and-place, articulated ob-jects, precise execution, and long-horizon multi-object assembly. Note that we use these “coding agents” because they are the easiest-to-use agents wrapped on top of the best available models, but we use them purely as general visual agents: VIA involves no CaP-style code generation and provides no perception or skill primitives for the model to compose. Despite never seeing the interface before, all tested agent-model configurations solve tasks end-to-end, zero-shot from a minimal prompt stating only the goal, with overall success rates ranging from 60% (Codex-5.5) to 88 % (CC-Fable), at an estimated API cost of a few dollars per successful episode on most tasks. VIA with CC-Fable achieves 96 .7% success on the LIBERO-Goal tasks and 100 % on a long-horizon task of arranging seven blocks into a rainbow. VIA can also consume demonstrations written as plain text: providing an example waypoint list lifts CC-Opus from 77% to 

100 % on the LIBERO-Goal tasks. Performance improves with the strength of the underlying model, and because VIA uses frontier models and agents unmodified, improvements in agent perception, reasoning, context management, or tool use transfers directly to robot control. VIA opens up a new 2opportunity for leveraging state-of-the-art FMs at scale in robotics, and demonstrates that with the right interface, robot control can become another economically valuable agentic task that benefits directly from modern models and agents. 

# 2 RELATED WORK 

We review work on foundation models as robot policies, Code-as-Policies, and computer-use agents. 

Foundation Models as Robot Policies. Foundation models (FMs) have demonstrated powerful and general perception and reasoning abilities. To leverage this for robotics, the most popular approach has been to fine-tune FMs into vision-language-action (VLA) models that directly predict low-level actions (Zitkovich et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Black et al., 2025). While these models have shown that FMs can enhance robot policies, their generalization abilities often still lag behind those of their base FMs, in part because fine-tuning on action data can degrade their reasoning and multimodal understanding abilities (Hancock et al., 2026). Furthermore, compute constraints typically restrict VLAs from leveraging the largest and most powerful FMs available. VIA instead uses FMs for robot control by casting it as computer use, avoiding robot-specific fine-tuning that can degrade generalization, and allowing for scaling with frontier computer-use agents. 

Code-as-Policies. Code-as-Policies (CaP) is a paradigm for robot control that uses FMs to write code to interface with perception and control modules (Liang et al., 2023; Singh et al., 2023). By avoiding task-specific training, CaP directly leverages the general reasoning and perception abilities of constituent FMs, often resulting in better generalization than end-to-end approaches that require robot data. However, code may not always be the optimal interface for FMs to control robots. For example, CaP depends on a predefined library of perception and control primitives (e.g., object detectors, pose estimators, or hand-crafted skills). CaP can be highly sensitive to the design of these primitives (Fu et al., 2026), thus requiring careful, potentially task-specific engineering. Like CaP, VIA also provides FMs with an engineered interface for robot control, but its interface is task-agnostic and exposes only generic kinematic control and raw sensor views. In the taxonomy of Fu et al. (2026), VIA operates below their lowest abstraction tier: the agent commands generic 6-DoF waypoints and receives no perception primitives. Perception and reasoning are deferred to the FM agent itself when possible, allowing for direct scaling with FM capabilities. 

Computer-Use Agents. A rapidly growing line of work equips FMs to operate computer software directly through visual interfaces and a small set of generic tools (e.g., taking screenshots, click-ing, typing) (Anthropic, 2024a; OpenAI, 2025b). Benchmarks such as OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) and WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) measure this competence on real desktop and web environments, and coding agents extend it to multi-step software tasks (Jimenez et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2025b). These agents exhibit strong closed-loop visual agency: they perceive an interface, act through tools, observe the outcome, and recover from mistakes. VIA repurposes this competence for robot manip-ulation by simply presenting the robot as another application the agent can operate, so that progress in computer-use agents transfers directly to robot control. 

# 3 VIA: V ISUAL INTERFACE AGENT FOR ROBOT CONTROL 

VIA recasts robot control as an agentic observe-act loop over a visual interface. An agent operates a browser-based 3D robot-control UI much as a person would: it takes a screenshot, reasons about what it sees, issues an intuitive command through an Model Context Protocol (MCP) tool, observes the result, and adjusts. It continues the loop until the task is complete or the episode times out. The agent observes only what the interface renders and has no access to privileged simulator state. For simplicity, we also do not provide any perception-assisting APIs such as segmentation functions, so visual understanding is solely the job of the agent and its underlying model. The MCP tools are low-level operations that set the target pose and gripper state of the end-effector, e.g., moving the gripper via gripper_drag , gripper_translate , or gripper_rotate , or changing its open/close state via gripper_toggle . We also provide a few functions to operate the camera and to show extra visual helpers on the UI. We drive VIA using general-purpose agents, with no robot-specific fine-tuning or additional scaffolding, to demonstrate that, given the right interface and MCP tools, existing agents 31: OPERATE the agent sets the next waypoint via tool calls                

> gripper_show_rotation_gizmo() gripper_rotate(axis, deg) gripper_teleport_via_click(u, v)
> target gripper
> execute_waypoint()
> 2: EXECUTE
> controller moves the robot
> 3: REPEAT
> plan and set the next waypoint

Figure 2: One round of the VIA control loop , shown on the open drawer task. Operate (top row, left to right): the agent sets the next waypoint through a few tool calls, here orienting the target gripper after viewing its rotation gizmo and then click-teleporting the gripper to the drawer handle. Every tool call returns an updated screenshot (image icons), so the agent checks the effect of each operation before issuing the next. Execute (bottom row, right to left): execute_waypoint hands the waypoint to the controller, which moves the real robot. Repeat (left arrow): the agent sees the outcome and plans the next waypoint, looping until termination. Note that the viewport has been adjusted by the agent to look towards the drawer in previous tool calls. and models can be strong robot manipulators. We describe the interface in Section 3.1, the set of tools in Section 3.2, and the agentic loop in Section 3.3. 3.1 VISUAL INTERFACE 

We build a browser-based 3D robot-control UI (center of Fig. 1). The interface requires multiple calibrated third-person RGB-D cameras to construct a 3D point cloud. We use the 3D point cloud as the main workspace because it allows the user (either a human or an AI agent) to change the viewport when necessary by applying the orbit , pan , or zoom functions to a virtual camera that can in principle observe the environment from any perspective, not limited to those of the fixed cameras used to construct the point cloud. This workspace also resembles 3D design software (e.g., Blender) and 3D games that the model may have been trained on, so its 3D reasoning capabilities may transfer. We also put two raw camera feeds on the left: a third-person view for understanding the overall scene, and a wrist view for close-up analysis during fine manipulation. Note that an agent observes the UI by taking screenshots of the whole UI, including the camera feeds, and it never reads the raw vectors of points in the point cloud. To control the robot in this interface, users set the 6-DoF target pose of the end-effector and a binary open/close state by manipulating a blue target gripper via mouse and keyboard operations. Users can click in the point cloud to teleport the target gripper near the clicked point, drag it with the mouse, or use the keyboard to translate it by exact metric offsets. Similarly, users can rotate the target gripper via the mouse by dragging it along a gizmo axis, or via the keyboard by typing a rotation axis and angle, e.g., {x -45 enter} . Users can apply any number of operations to the target gripper until it reaches a desired state, called a waypoint . Then, they call execute_waypoint ,which invokes a simple PI (proportional-integral) controller that moves the real gripper to the target 4Category Tools 

Observation screenshot , hover , gripper_get_pose ,

> gripper_show_rotation_gizmo

, camera_get_pose 

Action gripper_teleport_via_click , gripper_drag , gripper_translate ,

> gripper_advance_or_retreat

, gripper_rotate , gripper_toggle ,

> gripper_reset

Camera camera_orbit_via_key , camera_pan_via_key , camera_zoom , camera_reset 

Execution execute_waypoint , end_episode 

Table 1: MCP tools. The agent perceives the interface with screenshot and poses the blue tar-get gripper with intuitive tools such as gripper_teleport_via_click , gripper_translate , and 

> gripper_rotate

. It can also move the camera via the camera tools to disambiguate the scene.  

> execute_waypoint

moves the real gripper to the target pose through a controller. Most tools return an updated screenshot reflecting their effect on the UI or the real environment. pose via linear interpolation while obeying physical constraints. Fig. 2 shows VIA commanding and executing one waypoint to prepare the gripper for opening a drawer. This interface and waypoint-style control are largely borrowed from the teleoperation interface of SPHINX (Sundaresan et al., 2025), which demonstrated that humans can operate a similar interface to collect robot training data in both simulation and the real world. 3.2 MCP T OOLS 

The UI described above already enables a human to control the robot. To make it operable by agents, we wrap its core interactions into a small set of MCP tools, summarized in Table 1 and documented in full in Section A. The tools fall into four categories. Observation tools gather infor-mation about the environment. screenshot returns a screenshot of the entire UI. gripper_get_pose 

and camera_get_pose return the robot’s proprioceptive state and the current viewport parameters, respectively. We also provide two helper tools. hover takes a pair of (u, v) pixel coordinates and returns a screenshot with a virtual crosshair overlaid at that location, along with the 3D coor-dinates of the point it hits in the point cloud, if any. The agent can use it to verify that a planned click will land at the intended location, or to read off the 3D coordinates of points of interest.  

> gripper_show_rotation_gizmo

overlays a rotation gizmo on the target gripper to help the agent reason about rotation directions. Action tools manipulate the target gripper. They have no effect on the real robot until execute_waypoint is called. Each returns a screenshot after its change to the target gripper is rendered on the UI, so the agent can check the outcome and keep adjusting until the waypoint is ready for execution. Camera tools change the viewport so that the agent can observe the scene from angles beyond the default view. Execution tools affect the underlying environment, either moving the robot via execute_waypoint , or terminating the episode via end_episode .We design the tools around two principles: minimalism and agent ergonomics . For minimalism, each tool wraps the corresponding human operation with little or no extra abstraction, so agents can operate the system with the same control and freedom as a human. For agent ergonomics, we account for the fact that agents observe the UI through discrete screenshots rather than continuous animation. Operations such as rotating the gripper by dragging a gizmo axis or orbiting the camera with a continuous drag are therefore hard for an agent to comprehend, so we provide more direct alternatives, such as gripper_rotate and camera_orbit_via_key , which take exact angles as input. 3.3 AGENTIC LOOP 

With the MCP tools, any agent that takes images as input and is compatible with MCP can control the robot to perform useful tasks. We use Claude Code (CC) (Anthropic, 2025b) and Codex (Ope-nAI, 2025a) with their latest models to drive the system. We choose these agents not for writing code, as we are not doing Code-as-Policies, but simply because they are the most widely adopted, easy-to-use agents wrapping the most powerful models. Our goal is to show that general agents not 5Stack Turn on stove Open drawer Put bowl on plate Rainbow T-block 

> Initial Success

Figure 3: The six evaluation tasks. For each task, the top panel shows an example initial state and the bottom panel shows the final state of a successful VIA rollout, both captured by a third-person camera. Object placements are randomized across seeds. specifically built for robot control already possess skills such as general perception, spatial reason-ing, and planning that make them capable robot policies when equipped with the right interface. The agent completes a task via a loop of observing, thinking, and calling a tool that returns a new observation, until it reaches a terminal condition. This closed-loop structure lets the agent recover from errors and re-plan based on what it observes. We also delegate context and history management to the agent itself, to inherit its long-horizon planning capabilities for free. We equip the agent with a short system prompt that covers the basics of the interface and provides general guidance on using it effectively, such as the concept of waypoint sequences and preference for closed-loop verification over open-loop execution (full prompt in Section B.1). 3.4 EXTENSIONS 

By leveraging an agentic framework, VIA enables further possible directions for robotics research. 

Automatic Tool Improvement. The agent controlling the robot is also a highly capable reasoning and coding agent, so it can suggest modifications to existing tools and implement new tools on its own. When we developed the MCP tools, we spun off runs in which an agent read the docstring of a newly defined tool and tested it in the environment. We then asked the agent for feedback on both the functionality and the docstring of the tool, and used the feedback to improve them. 

Learning via Reflection. Learning from text feedback (Pryzant et al., 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2025) or text reflections (Shinn et al., 2023) has become a popular alternative to reinforcement learning for policy improvement with LLMs, but it has yet to gain broad attention in robotics. VIA naturally allows similar ideas to be applied on robot tasks via text or multimodal reflection, without updating model weights. We show that it is possible to create task-specific prompts that greatly improve performance, indicating that learning via reflection has a high ceiling for robotics. 

# 4 EXPERIMENTS 

We evaluate VIA on a suite of six diverse tabletop manipulation tasks to test how well our framework can control a robot through its visual interface. We run VIA with both Claude Code (CC) and Codex, each with two model tiers and two levels of prompt detail, to assess both the capability of frontier agents, and how their performance scales with model strength. 4.1 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

Tasks. We use the following tasks in our evaluation (Fig. 3): • Stack : Pick up a red cube and place it on a larger green cube, from robosuite (Zhu et al., 2020). • Turn on stove : Turn on a stove by rotating its knob, from LIBERO-Goal (Liu et al., 2023). • Open drawer : Open the middle drawer of a three-drawer cabinet, from LIBERO-Goal. 6Minimal prompt Detailed prompt Task CC-Opus CC-Fable Codex-5.5 Codex-5.6-Sol CC-Opus Codex-5.5 Stack 100% 100% 100% 100% – –Turn on stove 100% 100% 90% 90% 100% 90% Open drawer 70% 90% 30% 30% 100% 30% Put bowl on plate 60% 100% 40% 80% 100% 30% Rainbow 80% 100% 60% 50% – –T-block 10% 40% 40% 20% – –Overall 70% 88% 60% 62% 100% 50% Table 2: Success rate of VIA with different agent-model-prompt configurations. Success rates of CC-Opus, CC-Fable, Codex-5.5, and Codex-5.6-Sol under the minimal and detailed prompt vari-ants. ‘–’ marks combinations we do not evaluate. Bold marks the best agent per task within each prompt variant. The Overall row averages each column over its evaluated tasks. All Codex variants consistently fail to open the drawer far enough in Open drawer , so the numbers in those cells would be higher if we relax the condition. • Put bowl on plate : Pick up a bowl and place it on a plate, from LIBERO-Goal. This demands physical reasoning and precision, as the bowl must be grasped by pinching its side wall and placed at the exact center of the plate to succeed. • Rainbow : Arrange seven randomly placed colored blocks into a rainbow, a task we created. This tests long-horizon planning and execution. • T-block : Build a T-shape with three blocks of the same size: one blue block on the bottom and two green blocks resting directly on top of it, side by side; from BuilderBench (Ghugare et al., 2025), re-implemented. This requires both solving a physics puzzle and precise manipulation. Together, these tasks test a diverse set of skills: manipulation, physical reasoning, long-term plan-ning, and precise execution. All tasks run in the robosuite simulator. The outcome of each task is decided by a binary success detector, except for Rainbow , where we visually judge the final arrange-ment because valid rainbows vary in position, direction, and curvature. 

Agents and Evaluation Protocol. We use Claude Code (CC) and Codex as our agents. To compare how VIA scales with the size and strength of the underlying model, we run CC with both Opus 4.8 (CC-Opus) and Fable 5 (CC-Fable), and run Codex with both GPT-5.5 (Codex-5.5) and GPT-5.6-Sol (Codex-5.6-Sol). We run all agents at xhigh reasoning effort. On top of the shared system prompt mentioned in Section 3.3, we write task-specific prompts in two variants. The minimal variant states only the task’s goal and success condition. This variant tests the zero-shot performance of each agent. The detailed variant additionally provides an example list of waypoints. This list plays a role similar to a demonstration, except it is supplied as text in the prompt rather than as a recorded teleoperation trajectory (see Section B.2 for the full prompts). We evaluate each agent-model-prompt configuration over 10 seeds per task, with varying initial object placements. We cap each episode at one hour of wall-clock time, including all model inference and image transfer, although the agents complete most tasks in far less. Unless otherwise specified, we disable memory read/write for the agents so that they cannot gain cross-episode experience, although allowing agents to learn across episodes by updating their memory would be an interesting direction for future work. 4.2 RESULTS 

Table 2 summarizes the success rates of VIA with different configurations across tasks. 

VIA solves diverse manipulation tasks zero-shot. With the minimal prompt, VIA achieves aver-age success rates ranging from 60% (Codex-5.5) to 88% (CC-Fable), showing that, given the right interface, an existing agent can transfer its general perception, reasoning, tool-use, and UI-operation capabilities to robot control zero-shot , despite never seeing the interface before. The CC agents per-form better than the Codex agents, with CC-Fable essentially solving all tasks except for T-block .The high success rates on the LIBERO-Goal tasks Turn on stove and Open drawer indicate that VIA is not limited to pick-and-place motions. The Rainbow task is specifically designed to test 7Minimal prompt Detailed prompt Task CC-Opus CC-Fable Codex-5.5 Codex-5.6-Sol CC-Opus Codex-5.5 Stack 28 40 26 32 – –Turn on stove 36 39 33 31 43 32 

Open drawer 47 38 21 33 46 30 

Put bowl on plate 59 53 78 66 48 57 Rainbow 159 143 176 217 – –T-block 81 89 52 122 – –Overall 68 67 64 84 46 40 

Table 3: The average number of tool calls per successful episode. Mean number of MCP tool calls over successful episodes for each agent-model-prompt configuration. ‘–’ marks combinations we do not evaluate. Bold marks the fewest tool calls per task within each prompt variant. The Overall row averages each column over its evaluated tasks. Minimal prompt Detailed prompt Task CC-Opus CC-Fable Codex-5.5 Codex-5.6-Sol CC-Opus Codex-5.5 Stack $ 2.4 $ 7.3 $ 1.5 $ 1.6 – –Turn on stove $ 4.1 $ 8.9 $ 2.5 $ 2.2 $ 5.7 $ 3.3 

Open drawer $ 7.4 $ 7.5 $ 1.4 $ 1.1 $ 6.5 $ 1.7 

Put bowl on plate $ 7.5 $ 11.8 $ 8.1 $ 2.9 $ 5.0 $ 4.9 

Rainbow $ 26.0 $ 36.1 $ 23.4 $ 6.1 – –T-block $ 9.7 $ 19.2 $ 6.1 $ 10.5 – –Overall $ 9.5 $ 15.1 $ 7.2 $ 4.1 $ 5.7 $ 3.3 

Table 4: The average API cost per successful episode. Estimated mean API cost in USD over successful episodes for each agent-model-prompt configuration. CC costs are directly read from the session cost for each episode, while Codex costs are computed based on token usage and listed API pricing. Bold marks the lowest cost per task within each prompt variant. The Overall row averages each column over its evaluated tasks. Codex has a clear advantage on the cost front. long-horizon planning and execution, as it would require thousands of low-level steps for a typical learned policy, such as Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2023) or VLAs. CC-Opus and CC-Fable achieve success rates of 80% and 100% , respectively. Notably, the agent always plans carefully before mov-ing any block, estimating each block’s location and choosing the ordering with the fewest moves. The effect of such planning is visible in its behavior: it sometimes assembles the rainbow from left (red) to right (violet) and sometimes from right (violet) to left (red), depending on the initial distri-bution of the blocks. T-block remains challenging for all agents, which succeed only 10% to 40% 

of the time. All agents figure out the right strategy of rotating the bottom blue block by 45 degrees to increase the contact area, but they fail to place the green blocks precisely on each half of the blue block, as this task tolerates only about 8 mm of placement error. 

VIA can significantly improve with text demonstrations. We equip CC-Opus and Codex-5.5, the weaker model from each family, with the detailed prompts that provide example waypoint lists for the three LIBERO-Goal tasks. CC-Opus improves significantly on these three tasks, from 77% 

to a perfect 100% , while Codex-5.5 does not benefit from them. The improvement of CC-Opus is encouraging, as it shows that VIA offers a low-cost way to create “demonstrations” for robots from plain text or screenshots, rather than teleoperation. It also opens up the possibility of applying auto-matic prompt optimization so that agents can improve their own task prompts from past experience, i.e., learning via reflection. 

VIA scales with model size and capabilities. Within the CC family, upgrading from Opus 4.8 to Fable 5 improves the success rate on every task that has remaining headroom, raising the overall success rate from 70% to 88% . On the LIBERO-Goal tasks, CC-Fable passes 29/30 seeds with only the minimal prompt; in fact, its single failure would have been avoided had it pulled the drawer 8a few more centimeters out. With the minimal prompt alone, it essentially matches the perfect score that CC-Opus achieves only with the detailed instructions. The GPT family moves in the same direction on the precision-demanding Put bowl on plate , where upgrading from GPT-5.5 to GPT-5.6-Sol doubles the success rate from 40% to 80% . Its results elsewhere are mixed: Rainbow is roughly unchanged ( 60% to 50% ), and T-block drops from 40% to 20% . This mirrors a broader trend in foundation model research: as models improve, less prompt engineering is needed to reach the same performance. As general computer use becomes a centerpiece of recent model releases (Anthropic, 2026; OpenAI, 2026), VIA is well-positioned to harvest these general gains for robot control. 

Tool call efficiency and estimated costs. We report the mean number of MCP tool calls in Table 3 and the average API cost in Table 4, both over successful episodes. We omit failed episodes because the agents often keep trying until the one-hour limit, which would significantly skew the numbers and make them highly correlated with the success rates discussed above. For CC, the newer CC-Fable uses comparable or fewer tool calls than CC-Opus on all tasks except 

Stack and T-block , while achieving a much higher overall success rate. In Stack , CC-Fable’s extra tool calls are deliberate: it consistently rotates the gripper to align its fingers with the cube’s faces for a more stable grasp. In T-block , CC-Opus succeeds only once, so the comparison is noisy. However, when it comes to cost, CC-Fable is more expensive than CC-Opus on every task due to its 2× per-token price. For Codex, the trend reverses: the newer Codex-5.6-Sol uses more tool calls than Codex-5.5 on most tasks, despite having a comparable success rate. However, it excels on the cost front, and the newer model costs less on average under current pricing. More broadly, Codex is much cheaper than CC: a successful episode costs $ 4.1 on average for Codex-5.6-Sol and $ 7.2 for Codex-5.5, versus $ 9.5 for CC-Opus and $ 15 .1 for CC-Fable. Apart from differences in the token efficiency and unit cost of the underlying models, the design of the agent also has an impact on cost. For example, Codex auto-compacts its context more aggres-sively than CC, leading to a lower cost for input tokens. 

# 5 CONCLUSION 

We present VIA, a framework that recasts robot control as a visual agentic task: an off-the-shelf FM-powered agent operates a browser-based 3D interface built from RGB-D streams, posing target grippers and executing waypoints through human-legible MCP tools. With no robot-specific fine-tuning and no privileged state, VIA solves diverse manipulation tasks zero-shot with both Claude Code and Codex, at an estimated cost of a few dollars per successful episode on most tasks. Its strongest configuration, CC-Fable, achieves 96 .7% success on the LIBERO-Goal tasks and 100 %

on a seven-block long-horizon assembly task with only a minimal prompt. Performance improves with model strength, putting robot control aboard the grand ship of foundation model scaling: each new generation of general capability transfers to the robot for free, with no fine-tuning required. 

Limitations. VIA currently requires the best frontier models, since the novel interface and tasks demand a high level of general capability, so inference is slow and expensive. We expect similar performance from smaller and cheaper models as FMs continue to improve, with open-weight or less congested models further reducing cost and latency. Slow inference also restricts VIA to quasi-static tasks: it is not suitable for dynamic tasks like catching a ball. However, a wide range of quasi-static tasks carry significant value and existing methods are not yet reliable on them, making VIA a compelling option in this regime. 

Future Work. The most immediate next step is to extend VIA to real robots. Another is a more so-phisticated controller, which could improve performance on precision-demanding tasks like T-block 

and help avoid collisions. Even in its current form, VIA has practical uses: assembly tasks where reliability matters more than speed, reset mechanisms for real-world reinforcement learning, and data collection in which a slow interface agent generates demonstrations for training fast policies. 9REFERENCES 

Anthropic. Introducing computer use, a new Claude 3.5 Sonnet, and Claude 3.5 Haiku. https: //www.anthropic.com/news/3-5-models-and-computer-use , 2024a. Anthropic. Introducing the Model Context Protocol. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ model-context-protocol , 2024b. Anthropic. Claude 3.7 Sonnet and Claude Code. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-3-7-sonnet , 2025a. Anthropic. Claude Code. https://claude.com/product/claude-code , 2025b. Anthropic. Claude Fable 5 and Claude Mythos 5. https://www.anthropic.com/news/ claude-fable-5-mythos-5 , 2026. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Nic-colo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. 

π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. Rishi Bommasani et al. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 , 2021. Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin C. M. Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Diffusion Policy: Visuomotor Policy Learning via Action Diffusion. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. Letian Fu, Justin Yu, Karim El-Refai, Ethan Kou, Haoru Xue, Huang Huang, Wenli Xiao, Fei-Fei Li, Guanya Shi, Jiajun Wu, S. Shankar Sastry, Yuke Zhu, Ken Goldberg, and Linxi Fan. CaP-X: A Framework for Benchmarking and Improving Coding Agents for Robot Manipulation. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2026. Raj Ghugare, Roger Creus Castanyer, Catherine Ji, Kathryn Wantlin, Jin Schofield, Karthik Narasimhan, and Benjamin Eysenbach. BuilderBench: The Building Blocks of Intelligent Agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06288 , 2025. Asher James Hancock, Xindi Wu, Lihan Zha, Olga Russakovsky, and Anirudha Majumdar. Actions as Language: Fine-Tuning VLMs into VLAs Without Catastrophic Forgetting. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2026. Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P. Foster, Pannag R. Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Open-VLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2024. Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as Policies: Language Model Programs for Embodied Control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. LIBERO: Benchmarking Knowledge Transfer for Lifelong Robot Learning. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. OpenAI. Introducing Codex. https://openai.com/index/introducing-codex/ , 2025a. 10 OpenAI. Introducing Operator. https://openai.com/index/introducing-operator/ , 2025b. OpenAI. GPT-5.6: Frontier intelligence that scales with your ambition. https://openai.com/ index/gpt-5-6/ , 2026. Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic Prompt Optimization with “Gradient Descent” and Beam Search. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2023. Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. Technical report, OpenAI, 2019. Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of Bits: An Open-Domain Platform for Web-Based Agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflex-ion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. ProgPrompt: Generating Situated Robot Task Plans using Large Language Models. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023. Priya Sundaresan, Hengyuan Hu, Quan Vuong, Jeannette Bohg, and Dorsa Sadigh. What’s the Move? Hybrid Imitation Learning via Salient Points. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Sil-vio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. OSWorld: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineer-ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Pan Lu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. Optimizing generative AI by backpropagating language model feedback. Nature ,639:609–616, 2025. Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, Roberto Martín-Martín, Abhishek Joshi, Kevin Lin, Ab-hiram Maddukuri, Soroush Nasiriany, and Yifeng Zhu. robosuite: A Modular Simulation Frame-work and Benchmark for Robot Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293 , 2020. Brianna Zitkovich et al. RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. 11 A DOCUMENTATION OF MCP T OOLS 

This appendix includes the detailed signatures and docstrings of all the MCP tools used in this work. These docstrings are accessible to both Claude Code and Codex when they connect to the MCP server. Square brackets in a signature mark optional arguments. All gripper tools except  

> gripper_toggle

also share a common preamble describing the coordinate frame of the system, reproduced below. 

> Shared coordinate-frame preamble

Frame (shared by all spatial tools): • robot : metres; the canonical frame every pose, delta, and camera target reports in and that every tool input expects. • orientation : the gripper’s pose is reported as two robot-frame unit vectors, approach (the direction the fingers reach) and opening (the fingertip-to-fingertip axis the jaws open/close along). Robot Z position carries a fixed height offset, so a canonical top-down gripper reads z ≈ 1.0,not 0; reason about position deltas. A.1 OBSERVATION TOOLS 

> screenshot()

Capture a screenshot of the robot interface. The window shows: • Left sidebar: two camera feeds. Both are rendered from the real scene, and they refresh only after execute_waypoint moves the real gripper. The third-person view is a fixed camera looking at the table and gripper, best for analyzing the full scene layout (objects relative to each other and the gripper). The wrist view is a camera on the gripper looking down between the fingers, best for the close-up gripper-object relationship (whether the gripper is well positioned for a grasp or place). • Right main view: a 3D point-cloud reconstruction of the scene, with robot-frame axes (X red, Y green, Z blue) and the blue target gripper mesh you command. Best for 3D and depth understanding that the flat camera images cannot give. Call this first, or whenever you need a fresh view without taking an action. 

> hover(u, v)

Move the mouse to normalized screenshot coordinates (u, v ) and show a visible crosshair over-lay in the returned screenshot. The exact (u, v ) point is the crosshair’s center dot. Use hover to inspect a spot before acting on it. It takes no action and gives two readouts: • Visual: the crosshair (a persistent DOM overlay, not the OS cursor) marks exactly where 

(u, v ) lands, confirming it is on the intended UI element or point-cloud region. • Contact point (robot-frame x/y/z , in metres), computed read-only. On the point-cloud canvas or a camera feed it reports the cloud point under the cursor (the ray need not be pixel-exact; it hits within a small radius). Two uses: probing the robot-frame coordinate of any point of interest, and previewing a teleport, since a point it lands on is exactly the salient point that a gripper_teleport_via_click at the same (u, v ) would select. Note this is the clicked point itself, not the resulting gripper pose (which lands ∼0.07 m back along the approach axis). It reads none when (u, v ) is not over a cloud point (empty space), over the blue target gripper, or over UI chrome rather than the point-cloud canvas or a camera feed. 

12 gripper_get_pose() 

Return the current blue target gripper pose and visually show its approach axis in the screenshot. Besides giving a readout of the exact current gripper pose, the drawn approach axis makes this the best orientation check before using gripper_advance_or_retreat : it shows which way f/b

will step. Reports the center of the fingertips of the blue target gripper in robot-frame metres, its orientation as approach and opening unit vectors, and the open/closed state. The visual axis guide is shown without moving the gripper. 

> gripper_show_rotation_gizmo()

Show the gripper’s rotation gizmo (the three rotation rings) together with its approach axis in the screenshot. Always call this first to choose the gripper_rotate axis: it gives an intuitive visual understanding of the rotation axes (the x/y/z gizmo rings). The arrow on each rotation ring points in the + direction of that rotation. Reports the center of the fingertips of the blue target gripper in robot-frame metres, its orientation as approach and opening unit vectors, and the open/closed state. 

> camera_get_pose()

Return the current camera pose without taking an action. The camera orbits a target point, reported in the robot frame (metres) like every other pose: target is the world point the camera looks at, and distance is the camera-to-target separation in metres. azimuth and elevation 

give the viewing direction onto that target: azimuth is the horizontal orbit angle in degrees; elevation is 0 at horizontal (level with the target) and 90 at top-down, but orbiting keeps it within [0 , 85] so it never reaches the degenerate top-down pole (where azimuth would collapse to 0). The target is reported because pan and off-center zoom shift the scene center. Use these values to reason about the current framing before adjusting it with other camera tools. 

A.2 ACTION TOOLS 

> gripper_teleport_via_click(u, v)

Fast-move the blue target gripper near a clicked salient point; returns a screenshot. Best for quickly setting a subtask’s starting position; refine afterward with gripper_drag ,

> gripper_translate

, gripper_rotate , or gripper_toggle . Where to click: • The left-panel 2D camera views are best when the target is clearly visible in either camera feed. • The right-panel 3D point-cloud view is best when locating the target takes some 3D reason-ing about depth. • Click the object’s center, not its edge, so the gripper lands centered over it for a reliable grasp or place. The gripper lands ∼0.07 m back from the clicked point along its current approach axis (opposite the reach direction), not on the point itself, so a short forward move or descent then reaches it. For example, if the gripper currently points straight down, this puts it ∼0.07 m directly above the click. Translation only: the gripper’s orientation is preserved. The readout reports the clicked point as the “selected salient point” and the resulting gripper pose separately; check both, plus the screenshot. Clicking the blue target gripper itself does nothing here; that is reserved for 

> gripper_drag

.

13 gripper_drag(u1, v1, u2, v2, [constraint], [steps]) 

Drag the blue target gripper from (u1, v 1) to (u2, v 2); returns a screenshot. The blue target gripper is the target pose you command; this tool moves it. The gray point-cloud gripper is actual sensor data and is not a draggable mesh. The start point (u1, v 1) must ray-hit the solid blue target gripper mesh (a finger, wrist, or body), not the empty gap between the fingers or the gray gripper; a miss is refused with a no-op. A free drag moves the gripper with the cursor in the view plane, ∼0.0006 m per CSS pixel of mouse movement, before constraints. The optional  

> constraint

picks the movement mode; x/y/z lock motion to one robot-frame axis (the fixed robot X/Y/Z, not the gripper-attached gizmo axes that gripper_rotate spins about) and are exact at any camera angle, so trust the pose readout, not the picture: • free (default): unconstrained, follows the cursor in the camera view plane (camera-dependent). • x: lock to robot X only. • y: lock to robot Y only. • z: lock to robot Z (vertical). Tip: hover first to confirm (u1, v 1) lands on the gripper, then use small single-axis drags. The screenshot shows start and end markers, the end crosshair, the arrow path, and the updated pose. The optional steps sets the number of mouse-move interpolation steps (default 25). 

> gripper_translate([d_x], [d_y], [d_z])

Translate the blue target gripper by a metric offset along the robot-frame axes, in metres; returns a screenshot. You specify the offset directly, with no start point, mesh hit, or mouse drag needed, so it is the exact, camera-independent way to shift the gripper along the world axes. This is the keyed equivalent of gripper_drag ’s x/y/z axis locks without the cursor imprecision; the orientation is unchanged. Axes are the fixed robot X/Y/Z (the colored arrows), not the gripper-attached gizmo axes that gripper_rotate spins about, so the offsets are exact at any camera angle: d_x moves along robot X, d_y along robot Y, and d_z along robot Z (vertical: +z lifts, 

−z lowers). Set one offset for a pure single-axis move, or several to move diagonally; omitted offsets default to 0 and at least one must be nonzero. Each offset must be within ±0.1 m to keep moves gradual; larger requests are rejected, so call repeatedly to translate further. The returned text reports the actual pose delta after the move. 

> gripper_advance_or_retreat(direction, [steps])

Move the blue target gripper along its approach axis; returns a screenshot. Direction f steps along the approach axis (toward where the fingers point); b steps opposite it (retreat, back out). In the robot frame the direction follows the current orientation: at a top-down pose, f is −Z

(down) and b is +Z (lift), while on a side grasp the same steps are horizontal. If the current orientation makes the direction ambiguous, call gripper_get_pose first to see the approach axis drawn in the screenshot. One step is about 0.006 m along the approach axis; use 1–3 steps for small corrections and larger counts for coarse approach or retreat (default 1). The returned text reports the actual pose delta. 

> gripper_rotate(axis, angle)

Rotate the blue target gripper about one gizmo axis ( x, y, or z) by a signed angle in degrees; returns a screenshot. Important: call gripper_show_rotation_gizmo before every rotation and pick the axis and direction from the gizmo you see; do not guess. The x/y/z here are the gripper’s own gizmo axes, not the world/robot X/Y/Z (the colored arrows); they line up only at the top-down pose and move with the gripper after any tilt, so the same letter points a different way once the gripper is tilted. The gripper has three mutually perpendicular gizmo axes: the approach axis (where the fingers reach), the opening axis (the finger line), and a third axis perpendicular to 

14 both. Each rotation spins about one, leaving it fixed and re-aiming the other two (the arrow on each ring shows the + direction): • x: about the third axis; both the approach and opening axes re-aim. • y: about the opening axis; opening stays fixed, approach re-aims. • z: about the approach axis; approach stays fixed, opening re-aims (twist in place). The angle must be within [−90 , 90] degrees; prefer small steps (10–45 degrees) so you can observe the intermediate result and adjust before overshooting. The returned text reports the resulting approach and opening axes; the rotation is in place (position unchanged). If you are unsure about the axis or direction, rotate by a small amount and observe the outcome. 

> gripper_toggle([state])

Open or close the blue target gripper; returns a screenshot. Wraps the UI g key, which swaps the gripper mesh between open and closed. Pass state to drive a known result without check-ing the current state first: toggle (default) flips the current state, open ensures open (no-op if already open), and closed ensures closed (no-op if already closed). The returned message and screenshot report the resulting open/closed state, read back after the swap. 

> gripper_reset()

Reset the blue target gripper back onto the real gripper’s current pose (position, orientation, and open/closed state); returns a screenshot. Use this to undo experimental edits: freely try 

> gripper_drag

, gripper_advance_or_retreat , gripper_rotate , or gripper_toggle to plan a move, see how it looks, then reset to the real pose before committing the move you actually want. This only moves the blue target gripper; it does not move the real robot and records no waypoint. 

A.3 CAMERA TOOLS 

> camera_orbit_via_key(d_azimuth, d_elevation)

Orbit the camera around the scene target by an angular delta, in degrees; returns a screenshot. You specify the two orbit angles directly, with no start point or open-space click needed, so it is the simplest way to reframe. Both deltas are relative to the current pose (read camera_get_pose 

for the absolute angles); the distance and look-at target are unchanged, as this only rotates the viewpoint. Positive d_azimuth swings the camera counterclockwise seen from above, negative swings it clockwise; at the default view, azimuth is 90 with the camera at Y = 0 looking toward 

−X, and positive deltas swing it toward +Y , reaching a view toward −Y at azimuth 180. Positive d_elevation raises the camera toward a top-down view (elevation toward 90); negative lowers it toward a front or side horizontal view (elevation toward 0). Each delta must be within 

±45 degrees to keep camera moves gradual; larger requests are rejected, so call repeatedly to orbit further. Elevation is clamped to [0 , 85] (the horizon is allowed; the exact top-down pose is degenerate and kept just out of reach); azimuth wraps at 360. Returns the updated camera pose. 

> camera_pan_via_key(d_right, d_up)

Pan the camera (shift its look-at point) by a metric offset, in robot-frame metres; returns a screenshot. You specify the shift directly, with no start point or drag needed, so it is the simplest way to re-center the view without rotating. The viewing angle (azimuth/elevation) and distance are unchanged: the camera and its target slide together by the same amount, so only the framing moves. Positive d_right pans right, sliding the look-at point toward screen-right so you see more of what was off the right edge (scene content appears to slide left); negative pans left. Positive d_up pans up along world-Z (robot +z) so you see more above (scene content appears 

15 to slide down); negative pans down. Each offset must be within ±0.2 m to keep moves gradual; larger requests are rejected, so call repeatedly to pan further. Returns the updated camera pose, whose target shows the new framing center. 

> camera_zoom(u, v, [steps])

Zoom the camera toward normalized screenshot coordinates; returns a screenshot. The browser zooms toward the point under the mouse; (u, v ) should be inside the point-cloud view. Positive  

> steps

zoom in and negative zoom out (default 1); internally this sends scroll-wheel events to the browser. Each step changes the camera-to-target distance by a constant ∼0.03 m, regardless of the current zoom level or direction, so the step count is roughly the desired distance change divided by 0.03 m. An off-center zoom also shifts composition toward that point; use this deliberately to reframe while zooming. Returns the updated camera pose. 

> camera_reset()

Restore the initial camera view; returns a screenshot and the updated camera pose. Strategy: the default view is framed so most operations are viable from it, so prefer working there and return to it with this tool after exploring. Reach for camera_orbit_via_key or camera_pan_via_key 

only when the default view is insufficient, e.g., to resolve an occlusion or to judge the gripper-to-object relationship (depth, alignment, clearance) from another angle, then reset here to re-establish a known frame. 

A.4 EXECUTION TOOLS 

> execute_waypoint()

Execute the current gripper target and record one waypoint; returns a screenshot. This asks the robot controller to move the real gripper to the current target pose: position, orien-tation, and final open/closed gripper state. Use this after meaningful target-setting opera-tions such as gripper_teleport_via_click , gripper_drag , gripper_advance_or_retreat ,

> gripper_rotate

, or gripper_toggle . Execute a gripper_toggle on its own; do not combine it with a pose change in the same waypoint, since moving and opening/closing the gripper at once is unreliable. Execution uses the final target as the next base state for later operations. The controller interpolates between the current pose and the target pose; it does not replay the exact UI trajectory used to place the target. For example, if you toggled the gripper twice before executing, it only tries to match the final open/closed state, without intermediate toggles. If this waypoint achieves the task goal, the result reports TASK SUCCEEDED and that the connection is about to close. When you see that, stop: the episode is done and no further tools should be called. 

> end_episode()

Save and end the current episode and reset or advance the task; returns a screenshot. Call this only after the final waypoint for the episode has been executed. 

# B PROMPTS 

B.1 SYSTEM PROMPT 

The roughly 650-word system prompt covers the basics of the interface (target gripper, waypoints, camera feeds, point cloud workspace) and general guidance on using it effectively (task decompo-sition, closed-loop verification, common failure modes such as grasping too high). We reproduce it below, reformatted from Markdown into L ATEX with the content unchanged. 16 Robot Control Guide 

You operate a simulated robot arm through the sphinx-robot MCP server (sphinx/mcp_server.py ) to complete manipulation tasks. 

General Information. You control the robot via a 3D browser GUI, similar to 3D design soft-ware or a 3D game. The scene contains a robot arm with a gripper and a tabletop environment where you perform manipulations as instructed. You control the robot by setting and executing a sequence of “waypoints”: • There is a blue virtual gripper in the scene, called the “target gripper”. You manipulate this target gripper via tools to set a “waypoint”. • Repeat the following to complete a task, one waypoint at a time: 

– Set: move the target gripper to a desired pose (waypoint) via the tools defined in the MCP server. 

– Execute: A controller will bring the real gripper to the target gripper via a linear inter-polation while obeying physical constraints. 

– Check: After the waypoint is reached, the tool will return an image showing the updated UI (outcome). Decide the next pose based on the outcome. If the outcome isn’t what you intended, diagnose why it failed and retry that step or any earlier one that caused it. For example, to pick up a cube: move the gripper above it, descend until the cube sits between the fingers, close, then lift — each step is one waypoint that you set and then execute before moving on to the next. 

Tips: Decomposition and Planning. 

• Decompose the task into small subtasks by breaking the goal into a short sequence of simple stages. • Prefer closed-loop control over open-loop. Adjust the plan as you observe the outcome of previous waypoints. • Give gripper_toggle its own execute_waypoint cycle. Do NOT combine it with another pose change (translate/rotate/advance...) in one waypoint. Moving and toggling the gripper at the same time could be unpredictable. 

Tips: Precision. 

• Be precise with gripper_teleport_via_click — it’s the best way to set a good initial position. 

– The clicked point lands on the gripper’s approach axis, so a precise click will make future approaching easy. 

– Use hover to double-check whether the predicted (u, v ) would land where you intend to click. • Placing an object onto another object is a precision-sensitive task. First reason about where the held object should land, and then reason about where to set the target gripper, accounting for the relation between the gripper and the held object. • Always check the visual from the point cloud or the camera feeds. Do NOT solely rely on the coordinates from hover . When necessary, make fine adjustments with translate, rotate, advance_or_retreat, and similar operations. 

Tips: Viewing and Camera Movement. 

• Two camera feeds on the left. 

– They provide raw camera images from 3rd-person view and wrist view. 

– The 3rd-person view is good for understanding the scene and disambiguating objects. 

– The wrist view is good for close-up analysis and fine adjustments. 

– gripper_teleport_via_click also accepts clicking on a camera feed. Sometimes this could be more convenient than clicking on the point cloud. • The 3D point cloud on the right. 

– This is the main workspace. It constructs the 3D scene from multiple depth cameras. 

– The initial view (resettable via camera_reset ) is framed to be good for most operations. It is a good default so prefer working in it. 

17 – A pure top-down view (elevation ≥ 80 ) may not be as useful as you think, because the gripper and robot arm may block most of the workspace. 

– Sideview (orbit by changing azimuth ±30 –45 ) or frontview (elevation ∼ 10 ) could be very helpful if object-gripper or object-object relation is hard to interpret in the initial default view. 

– Move the camera gently, and reset to the initial view via camera_reset to recover from a failed camera operation. 

Tips: Common Failures. 

• Grasping too high is a common failure. Descend deep so that the fingers and the object to hold have enough contact surface. 

B.2 TASK PROMPTS 

Each episode’s prompt has two parts: a one-sentence task instruction embedded in a fixed user-message template, and a task-specific tips file appended to the agent’s system prompt. For the three LIBERO-Goal tasks we write both a minimal version stating only the goal and success condition, and a detailed version containing an example list of waypoints. Rainbow and T-block each have a single prompt. We reproduce all of them below, reformatted from Markdown into L ATEX with the content unchanged. 

Turn on stove. 

Task instruction: “Turn on the stove.” 

Turn on stove: minimal prompt 

The goal is to turn on the stove, which requires rotating the black control knob on the back of the stove by 90 degrees counter-clockwise viewed from the top. Think carefully about what the task actually requires and about the tools available to you. Plan an approach that reaches the goal with precision and efficiency. 

Turn on stove: detailed prompt 

To turn on the stove, we need to rotate the black control knob on the back of the stove by 90 degrees counter-clockwise. Example waypoints: 1. Locate the black control knob on the back of the stove and use  

> gripper_teleport_via_click

to teleport the gripper on top of the knob. 2. Lower the gripper towards the knob, and adjust the gripper if needed so that the stem of the knob is roughly in the middle of the fingers. 3. Close the gripper to hold the stem of the knob. 4. Rotate the gripper 90 degrees counter-clockwise to turn the stove on. 

Open drawer. 

Task instruction: “Open the middle (2nd from the top) drawer of the cabinet.” 

Open drawer: minimal prompt 

The goal is to open the middle (2nd from the top) drawer of the cabinet by pulling it out by its handle. Think carefully about what the task actually requires and about the tools available to you. Plan an approach that reaches the goal with precision and efficiency. 18 Open drawer: detailed prompt 

The trick to opening a drawer is to first rotate the gripper so that the approach axis will point towards the handle when we use gripper_teleport_via_click . Then clicking the handle lands the gripper ∼0.07 m directly in front of it, already aligned to drive straight in. Example waypoints: 1. Rotate the gripper so its approach axis points roughly horizontally at the handle. 2. Use gripper_teleport_via_click on the handle of the correct drawer. 3. Move forward along the approach axis until the handle is between the open fingers. Check in the wrist view that the handle is centered. Use gripper_translate or gripper_rotate 

to center the handle between the jaws if it is off. 4. Close the gripper. 5. Pull straight back along the approach axis, keeping the gripper level, until the drawer is open (may take more than one pull). 

Put bowl on plate. 

Task instruction: “Put the bowl on the plate.” 

Put bowl on plate: minimal prompt 

The goal is to pick up the bowl and place it on the plate. Success requires the bowl to end up resting at the exact center of the plate. Think carefully about what the task actually requires and about the tools available to you. Plan an approach that reaches the goal with precision and efficiency. 

Put bowl on plate: detailed prompt 

How to pick up a bowl. To pick up a bowl, we need to pinch it by its side wall with a straight top-down descent. Here we give example waypoints assuming we pick it from the right ( +Y

direction). Example waypoints: 1. Locate the bowl, and click on the rightmost point on the rim (pinch point). Trick: The click point must land on the bowl not on the table; after gripper_teleport_via_click , read the salient point’s Y from the output; nudge the click along the rim and re-check until Y stops increasing while the click point still lands on the bowl not on the table. 2. Descend the gripper low for a firm grasp. 3. Close the gripper. 4. Lift the gripper. After a lift, judge grasp success from the point cloud (frontview could be helpful), not the wrist view. 

How to place onto a plate. This task requires the held object to be placed exactly at the center 

to claim a success. When holding a bowl, the held object’s center is offset from the gripper, so we need to account for that when deciding the target location for the gripper. Example waypoints: 1. gripper_teleport_via_click on the desired location of the plate so that the held object will roughly appear above the center of the plate. E.g. holding the bowl by its right ( +Y )rim, click on the right ( +Y ) half of the plate. Adjust the height after clicking to avoid collision. 2. Observe the outcome of the first waypoint and adjust the gripper if needed. Do NOT solely trust the readout from hover . Check the visual from the camera and 3D point cloud carefully as well. 3. Descend until the object rests on the plate (contact stops the descent), with a final small XY 

nudge if needed. 4. Open the gripper to release the held object. 19 Rainbow. 

Task instruction: “Rearrange the blocks so that it forms a rainbow. Be creative.” 

Rainbow: prompt 

Note that this is a creativity task with no built-in reward/termination detector. Call end_episode 

when you are done. You may accidentally knock over some blocks while arranging others, therefore you should double check the final arrangement before calling end_episode .

T-block. 

Task instruction: “Build a structure exactly two blocks tall: the blue block on the bottom, and both green blocks resting directly on top of it, side by side at the same height. Neither green block may sit on the other or on the table.” 

T-block: prompt 

The scene has three cubes of the same size : one blue and two green. Goal: build a structure that is exactly two cubes tall :• Bottom layer: the blue cube, resting on the table. • Top layer: both green cubes, sitting side by side on top of the blue cube. For the result to count as correct, all of the following must hold: • Both green cubes rest directly on the blue cube — each green cube touches the blue cube’s top face. • The two green cubes are at the same height (same level), side by side. • The final structure is two cubes tall , never three. • The final structure is stable: each green cube has enough contact/support area on the blue cube that it will not tip or fall. Each cube is the same size, so two greens side by side are twice as wide as the blue:    

> [green][green] <- top layer: both greens, same level, both on the blue [blue ] <- bottom layer: blue on the table (same size as one green) ============== table

Incorrect (do NOT do this): • A three-tall tower: one green on the blue, and the second green stacked on top of the first green. • Either green cube resting on the table, or on the other green cube, instead of directly on the blue cube. • The two green cubes ending up at different heights. Tips: Note that because each green cube is exactly as wide as the blue cube’s top face, two greens placed side by side in the blue’s default orientation cannot both get enough support area — at least one will overhang too far and tip off. Reason about how to reorient the blue cube so that both greens gain enough contact area to rest stably, side by side, at the same level. 20