HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
HARNESSWAM: BRIDGING PREDICTION AND DELIB-
ERATION IN WORLD ACTION MODELS
Zhaopeng Gu1,2 Bingke Zhu1,2∗Tianxi Lin3,4 Guibo Zhu1,2 Yingying Chen1,2 Kai Wang1,3
Tingyu Yuan1,2 Chaoyang Zhao1 Zhaowen Li3∗Peng Su3 Jinqiao Wang1,2,5
1 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3 Yinwang Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
4 Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
5 Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China
ABSTRACT
World Action Models (WAMs) jointly learn environmental dynamics and robot
actions, introducing priors over physical evolution into embodied control. However,
finite-horizon prediction and action generation are insufficient for complex em-
bodied tasks that require global planning, cross-stage state maintenance, execution
verification, and failure recovery. We refer to this mismatch as the prediction-
deliberation gap of WAMs. To address this gap, we propose HarnessWAM, an
agentic framework for WAMs. HarnessWAM employs a vision-language-model-
based Task Manager to maintain an evidence-grounded scene belief and a structured
task graph. A capability-conditioned executable-space projection further constrains
open-ended semantic plans into sequences of atomic skills that satisfy task depen-
dencies, embodiment-state constraints, and the capability boundary of the under-
lying WAM. During execution, HarnessWAM operates through an event-driven,
dual-timescale feedback loop: a lightweight progress estimator continuously pro-
vides high-frequency execution evidence, while the Task Manager deliberates at
salient milestones by jointly considering the current observation, task state, and
interaction history to determine whether to advance the task, acquire additional
observations, revise the plan, or initiate local recovery. This mechanism enables
the robot to recover its state after a subtask failure and resume execution without
discarding previously acquired scene knowledge. HarnessWAM achieves state-of-
the-art full-task and subtask success rates of 59.6% and 69.9% on RoboMemArena,
and an SR of 23.7% on RoboCerebra Ideal. These results demonstrate that model-
external structured state maintenance and closed-loop agentic decision making
can effectively extend the local control capabilities of WAMs into embodied task
execution that is plannable, verifiable, and recoverable.
1
INTRODUCTION
World Action Models (WAMs) jointly model future observations, environment states, and robot
actions, enabling control policies to learn environmental dynamics and the physical consequences
of robotic interventions (Li et al., 2026; Ye et al., 2026). Their predictive representations provide a
foundation for outcome-aware control, closed-loop correction, and generalizable embodied agents.
However, finite-horizon prediction alone is insufficient for persistent agentic decision making. Al-
though WAMs can reliably predict near-term physical evolution and execute local manipulation
skills, they do not explicitly maintain the global task state required to verify outcomes, propagate
evidence across stages, or determine how to recover from failure. We call this mismatch between
local predictive control and the persistent deliberation required by open-ended embodied tasks the
prediction–deliberation gap. Figure 1 illustrates this gap in a partially observable task whose target is
revealed only through sequential exploration.
Language-model agents demonstrate that a foundation model’s effective capabilities depend on the
harness through which it maintains state, invokes actions, and incorporates feedback (Yao et al., 2022;
∗Corresponding authors.
1
arXiv:2608.09516v1  [cs.RO]  10 Aug 2026


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Task
Success
Task
Success
Memory-Dependent Long-Horizon Task: 
Place cookie in not-empty drawer
Conventional WAM
HarnessWAM
Global
Instruction
Observation
Global
Instruction
Global
Instruction
Observation
Drawer 1
Drawer 2
Drawer 3
Task Evidence
D1 Empty | D2 Empty | D3 Object Found
HarnessWAM
Explore 3 drawers
Belief update: target drawer = D3
OPEN (D3)
Task
Failure
Task
Failure
PICK 
PICK 
PLACE
Recovery
Planning
Planning
Execution
Execution
Evaluation
Evaluation
Memory
Memory
Recovery
Recovery
Initial state
Find the drawer containing        and put        inside it.
Find the drawer containing        and put        inside it.
Goal state
Goal state
Target drawer is unobserved
Cookie in the right drawer
WAM
WAM
Failure
Execution Runtime
Evaluation
Direct autoregressive action generation
No plan; No memory; Don`t know where to place cookie.
Place cookie in the 
wrong drawer
Figure 1: Prediction–deliberation gap in a memory-dependent task. A conventional WAM leaves the
target unresolved, whereas HarnessWAM accumulates evidence, binds the target, and coordinates
subsequent execution.
Shinn et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024). Existing harnesses mainly target digital environments with
discrete interfaces and explicit feedback. Physical interaction instead involves continuous control,
partial observability, uncertain outcomes, and potentially irreversible state changes. An embodied
harness must consequently ground semantic reasoning in executable skills while persistently tracking
task state and physical effects.
We introduce HarnessWAM, an agentic framework that addresses this challenge through a structured
runtime external to the WAM. A vision-language-model-based Task Manager maintains an evidence-
grounded scene belief and represents the global instruction as a task graph containing both physical
and cognitive operations. Unresolved entities remain symbolic until sufficient visual evidence
supports their binding. A capability-conditioned executable-space projection then compiles open-
ended semantic plans into primitive sequences supported by validated WAM skills, enforcing task
dependencies and consistency with the current scene and embodiment state.
HarnessWAM coordinates physical execution through an event-driven, dual-timescale loop. On
the fast timescale, a lightweight progress estimator continuously summarizes subtask progress and
completion evidence. On the slow timescale, the Task Manager deliberates only at salient milestones
or changes in execution conditions, jointly considering the current observation, progress history,
scene belief, task graph, and execution state. It determines whether to continue, advance, acquire
evidence, replan, or recover, and may revise only the unexecuted graph suffix when new observations
resolve prior uncertainty. Upon local failure, HarnessWAM restores the robot embodiment toward its
subtask-initial state while retaining acquired scene knowledge and task memory. The resulting loop
integrates planning, execution, evaluation, memory, and recovery without requiring changes to the
WAM architecture.
HarnessWAM achieves state-of-the-art full-task and subtask success rates of 59.6% and 69.9% on
RoboMemArena (Lei et al., 2026). On RoboCerebra Ideal (Han et al., 2026), it attains an SR of 23.7%.
These results show that structured agentic orchestration substantially improves WAM reliability in
partially observable, memory-dependent, and multi-stage manipulation.
Our main contributions are:
• We identify the prediction-deliberation gap and formulate reliable WAM execution as
model-external state estimation and closed-loop decision making.
2


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
• We introduce evidence-grounded task state and capability-conditioned executable-space
projection to compile open-ended VLM plans into feasible WAM skill sequences.
• We develop an event-driven, dual-timescale mechanism for progress-aware task transitions,
plan revision, and local embodiment-state recovery.
• We establish state-of-the-art performance on RoboMemArena and RoboCerebra Ideal,
validating HarnessWAM on challenging long-horizon embodied tasks.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
PREDICTIVE WORLD MODELS AND WORLD ACTION MODELS
Action-conditioned visual prediction has long supported model-predictive robot control by forecasting
the effects of candidate actions (Ebert et al., 2017; 2018b). Recent generative approaches scale this
principle through text-conditioned video policies, pretrained video diffusion, and unified video
simulation and action decoding (Du et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2025). These results
establish future visual modeling as a useful source of physical-dynamics priors for policy learning.
World Action Models (WAMs) more directly couple future-observation modeling with action genera-
tion. LingBot-VA enables closed-loop asynchronous control through autoregressive video–action
generation (Li et al., 2026), while DreamZero demonstrates transfer across tasks, scenes, and em-
bodiments (Ye et al., 2026). Fast-WAM separates video co-training from test-time future generation,
showing that representations acquired through predictive training can support efficient action infer-
ence without explicit rollout synthesis (Yuan et al., 2026). Recent extensions additionally incorporate
compressed or boundary-triggered history into WAM inference (Sun et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026).
This line of work primarily advances dynamics representation, transfer, memory conditioning, and
inference efficiency within the model. HarnessWAM addresses an orthogonal question: how to
organize local WAM predictions and actions into persistent task-level behavior whose intermediate
effects can be verified and whose failures can be recovered.
2.2
HARNESSES FOR EMBODIED AGENTS
Language-agent research demonstrates that foundation-model capability depends strongly on the ex-
ternal loop through which the model maintains state, invokes actions, and incorporates feedback (Yao
et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2024). Such harnesses are commonly developed for soft-
ware environments with discrete interfaces, explicit return values, and repeatable execution. Physical
interaction instead involves continuous control, partial observability, uncertain action outcomes, and
state changes that may be irreversible. Consequently, an embodied harness must ground semantic
decisions in physically executable skills and maintain task state beyond individual model calls.
Robot planning provides several components of this interface. SayCan grounds language plans with
skill affordances (Ahn et al., 2022); Inner Monologue introduces environment feedback into language
planning (Huang et al., 2022); and SayPlan and VoxPoser ground high-level reasoning in scene
geometry (Rana et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023). Task-and-motion planning and manipulation primi-
tives similarly connect symbolic structure to continuous feasibility (Garrett et al., 2021; Morrow &
Khosla, 1997; Chen et al., 2024). Complementary work studies persistent embodied memory (Guhur
et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2026; Blukis et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2026), stage-aware progress and outcome
modeling (Maeda et al., 2020; Agia et al., 2024; Luo, 2024; Chen et al., 2025), and failure detection
or corrective execution (Ebert et al., 2018a; Zhao et al., 2026; Ying et al., 2026).
HarnessWAM unifies these ingredients around a WAM executor. A Task Manager maintains an
evidence-grounded belief and structured task graph, while a deterministic projection compiles
open-ended semantic plans into validated WAM skills subject to task dependencies and embodi-
ment constraints. Progress estimation and sparse semantic verification govern task transitions, and
embodiment-state recovery handles local execution failures without discarding acquired scene knowl-
edge. This formulation makes planning, memory, verification, and recovery components of a single
event-driven decision process rather than independent additions to the control policy.
3


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Task Input
HarnessWAM
Language Instruction
Executable-Space Projection
World Action Model
Place cookie in not-empty drawer.
Current Observation
Agent-view
Wrist-view
Robot State
Joint Position | Gripper state | EEF Pose
Embodied Environment
Task 
Manager
State Update
Recovery
Planning
Evaluation
OBSERVE
CONTINUE
ADVANCE
REPLAN
RECOVER
TERMINATE
VLM Task Manager
Task Graph
Evidence Memory
Observe 
Drawers
 Drawer 1
 Drawer 2
 Drawer 3
Identify
Target
Pick & 
Place
Verify
Open-Vocabulary 
Semantic Subgoals
WAM-Executable 
Primitives
Execution Runtime
Cookie: On the table
D1 Empty | D2 Empty | D3 Object Found
Evidence-grounded Task State
Deterministic Plan Compiler
Capability
Dependence
Robot Status
Progress Monitor
Progress
Trend
Critical Event Trigger
• Milestone
• Timeout
• Stage Change
Local Recovery
• Restore Arm & 
Gripper
• Keep Memory
Finite-Horizon Action Generation
at
at+1
at+2
at+H
...
New Observation
Physical Effect
Figure 2: Overview of HarnessWAM. The VLM Task Manager converts a global instruction and
current observations into an evidence-grounded task graph. Executable-space projection compiles
open-vocabulary semantic subgoals into WAM-supported primitives subject to capability, dependency,
and embodiment-state constraints. The WAM and execution runtime form a fast control loop, while
event-triggered Task Manager decisions update state, revise the plan, recover the robot embodiment,
or terminate execution.
3
METHOD
3.1
PROBLEM FORMULATION
Consider an embodied manipulation task specified by a natural-language instruction x. At time t, the
environment returns multi-view RGB observations ot = (Iagent
t
, Iwrist
t
) and the robot proprioceptive
state qt. Given a local skill instruction gk, a World Action Model Wθ generates an action chunk of
horizon H conditioned on a finite interaction history:
At = Wθ(o≤t, qt, gk) = (at, . . . , at+H−1).
(1)
Each WAM invocation solves a local, finite-horizon control problem defined by gk. Completing the
global task additionally requires maintaining latent state across execution stages, assessing physical
effects, and revising subsequent decisions as new evidence arrives. We therefore define a harness
as a model-external decision process H operating over discrete task events. It transforms a global
instruction into a sequence of verified WAM invocations with the objective of maximizing task-level
success. At event time τk, we define the embodied runtime state as
zk = (Bk, Gk, Mk, rk),
(2)
where Bk, Gk, Mk, and rk denote the scene belief, structured task graph, task memory, and execution
state of the active skill, respectively. HarnessWAM recursively updates this state from a new
observation and event ek, and selects the next local goal:
(zk+1, gk+1) = H(x, zk, oτk, ek).
(3)
This formulation separates continuous WAM control from task-level deliberation. The WAM realizes
a local skill, while the harness determines which skill to invoke, when its execution should terminate,
how its outcome changes the task state, and how execution should proceed after failure. The overall
objective is to maximize goal satisfaction at task termination.
Figure 2 summarizes the HarnessWAM architecture and its event-driven interaction with the embodied
environment.
4


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
3.2
EVIDENCE-GROUNDED TASK STATE
In a partially observable environment, the current image is generally insufficient for selecting future
behavior. Once a drawer has been closed, for example, the current observation no longer reveals
whether it contained a target object. HarnessWAM therefore maintains a scene belief Bk comprising
entities together with their attributes, relations, and epistemic status. Each scene fact is represented as
f = (s, p, o, v, η, c, E),
(4)
where
s,
p,
o,
and
v
denote
the
subject,
predicate,
object,
and
value;
η
∈
{observed, inferred, unknown} distinguishes direct observations, inferred facts, and unre-
solved state; c is a confidence score; and E references the supporting RGB evidence. This representa-
tion distinguishes not observed from observed to be false: an object becoming occluded does not
invalidate a previously established scene fact.
To preserve the cross-stage history and visual evidence underlying this belief, HarnessWAM maintains
Mk = (M task
k
, M evidence
k
),
(5)
where M task
k
stores completed and failed nodes, retry counts, variable bindings, and the plan-revision
history, while M evidence
k
stores visual evidence associated with salient task events. The Task Manager
invokes the VLM only at event times to jointly update the scene belief and memory:
(Bk+1, Mk+1) = UVLM(x, oτk, Bk, Mk, ek).
(6)
Long interaction histories are thus compressed into a queryable and updateable task state whose
claims can be traced to visual observations. This explicit compression reduces the need for a VLM to
reconstruct task history implicitly from a long video context.
The Task Manager further represents the task as a directed graph
Gk = (Vk, Ek, Xk, βk),
(7)
where Vk is the node set, Ek contains dependency edges, Xk comprises unresolved symbolic variables,
and βk : Xk ⇀O is a partial binding from variables to scene entities. Each node is represented as
vi =
 opi, argi, prei, effi, termi, reci

,
(8)
specifying an operation, typed arguments, preconditions, expected effects, termination conditions,
and a recovery strategy. The graph includes both motor nodes, which induce physical actions, and
cognitive nodes, which acquire observations, verify state, bind variables, or update memory. When
an entity cannot be identified from the initial observation, the Task Manager retains a symbolic
variable instead of committing to an unsupported guess, and updates βk once sufficient evidence be-
comes available. This graph expresses sequential dependencies, information acquisition, conditional
branches, and delayed decisions after exploration within a unified representation.
3.3
CAPABILITY-CONDITIONED EXECUTABLE-SPACE PROJECTION
A VLM can propose plans in an open semantic space, whereas a WAM can reliably execute only those
local skills supported by its training distribution and control interface. HarnessWAM connects these
levels through a projection from open-ended semantic plans to a capability-conditioned executable
space, after which the WAM produces continuous control commands.
We define an extensible ontology of parameterized operations:
P⋆= Pmotion ∪Pgrasp ∪Pcontact ∪Particulation ∪Passembly ∪Ptool,
(9)
corresponding to free-space motion, object acquisition and release, contact-rich interaction,
articulated-object manipulation, assembly, and tool use. Each primitive denotes an operation family
with open object arguments and explicit physical semantics, while the WAM generates a concrete
trajectory from the current observation. A primitive has the unified representation
p =
 τp, Θp, Prep, Effp, Termp, Recp

,
(10)
where τp denotes the interaction type, Θp is a typed parameter space, and the remaining terms specify
preconditions, expected effects, termination criteria, and recovery rules.
5


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
This compact interface is motivated by empirical evidence that motor behavior exhibits low-
dimensional, repetitive, and compositional structure. In natural work activities, the ten most frequent
human grasp types account for 81% of grasp duration and 72% of grasp instances (Bullock et al.,
2013). Two kinematic primitives explain 95% of the cumulative variance in discrete reaching mo-
tions (Moro et al., 2012), and two postural hand synergies explain more than 80% of the variance in
15-DoF grasps over 57 objects (Santello et al., 1998). Robotic manipulation can likewise be orga-
nized through a finite set of relative-motion classes between rigid bodies (Morrow & Khosla, 1997).
These findings motivate a compact, parameterized, and extensible behavior basis for organizing
high-dimensional control. The ontology can grow with the validated capabilities of the WAM and the
requirements of the task domain.
For a particular WAM, the executable primitive set is determined by the skills that the model has
acquired and that have been empirically validated:
PW = {p ∈P⋆| p has a validated realization under Wθ} .
(11)
Let L(PW ) denote the plan language generated by supported primitives, and let F(zk) denote the
feasible set induced by the current scene, object bindings, task dependencies, and embodiment state.
HarnessWAM projects a VLM-generated graph as
Gexec
k
= ΠL(PW )∩F(zk)
 Gvlm
k

.
(12)
The projection is implemented by a deterministic plan compiler. It checks argument types, node de-
pendencies, precondition–effect consistency, single-arm holding state, and graph acyclicity, and then
canonicalizes valid nodes into local WAM instructions. For example, PLACE(object, target)
requires the same object to have been acquired, POUR(object, target) requires the robot to
be holding that object, and OPEN and CLOSE must satisfy the corresponding gripper and object-state
constraints. A semantic node that admits a composition of supported primitives is expanded into
a valid sequence. If no feasible projection exists, the compiler returns ⊥and reports the violated
constraints to the Task Manager for replanning.
New observations may change variable bindings or future branches. To preserve consistency with the
physical history, HarnessWAM permits revisions only to the unexecuted suffix of the task graph and
enforces the history-invariance constraint
Gk+1

V executed
k

= Gk

V executed
k

.
(13)
3.4
PROGRESS-CONDITIONED EVENT CONTROL
Invoking a VLM at every environment step is computationally expensive and exposes task-level
decisions to transient visual fluctuations. HarnessWAM instead adopts dual-timescale control: the
WAM and a lightweight progress estimator form a fast execution loop, while the Task Manager forms
a slow deliberation loop triggered by semantic events.
In the fast loop, the WAM repeatedly generates action chunks conditioned on the local instruction gk
of the active node. A prompt-conditioned progress estimator Fϕ predicts continuous progress and
completion likelihood from the most recent L frames of dual-view RGB observations and the text:
(pt, ct, πbin
t
) = Fϕ(ot−L+1:t, gk),
(14)
where pt ∈[0, 1] denotes continuous progress, ct ∈[0, 1] denotes the probability of stage completion,
and πbin
t
is a discrete distribution over progress intervals. Fϕ extracts multi-view spatial features with
a frozen vision–language encoder and models local temporal changes with a causal temporal module.
It is trained with
Lprog = λrLreg + λbLbin + λrLrank + λeLendpoint + λsLsuccess + λmLmono,
(15)
whose terms supervise continuous progress, progress intervals, temporal ordering, trajectory end-
points, stage completion, and local monotonicity, respectively. The estimator continuously supplies
execution evidence for the active skill. The runtime converts the progress sequence into candidate
milestone events; exhaustion of a skill budget or changes in a condition or variable binding also
trigger task-level deliberation. Progress predictions alone never advance the task graph.
6


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Algorithm 1 Event-driven HarnessWAM inference
Require: Instruction x, initial RGB observation o0, WAM Wθ, task budget Ω
Ensure: Task outcome in {success, failure}
1: (B, M) ←INITIALIZE(x, o0)
2: Gvlm ←PLAN(x, B, M)
3: G ←PROJECT(Gvlm, Wθ, B)
4: while Ω> 0 and G contains an unfinished required node do
5:
v ←SELECTREADYNODE(G)
6:
if v is a cognitive node then
7:
Acquire evidence and update B, M, bindings, and the graph suffix
8:
Mark v complete and reproject the unexecuted graph
9:
continue
10:
end if
11:
(q0, u0) ←current arm and gripper state; activate v
12:
while v is active and Ω> 0 do
13:
At ←Wθ(o≤t, qt, PROMPT(v))
14:
Execute At, observe ot+1, and update Ω
15:
ˆsprog ←Fϕ(recent RGB, PROMPT(v))
16:
if EVENT(ˆsprog, r, G) then
17:
(ν, d, ∆B, ∆β, ρ) ←TVLM(x, ot+1, B, G, M, r, ˆsprog)
18:
Update B, M, bindings, and, if ρ, the unexecuted graph suffix
19:
if d = advance then
20:
Mark v complete; break
21:
else if d = observe then
22:
Acquire additional evidence and update the task state
23:
else if d = replan then
24:
Revise and reproject the graph suffix; deactivate v
25:
else if d = recover then
26:
Restore (q0, u0) and clear the local WAM state
27:
Revise and project the recovery plan; deactivate v
28:
else if d = terminate then
29:
return failure
30:
end if
31:
end if
32:
end while
33: end while
34: if all required nodes are complete and VERIFYGOAL(x, o, B) then
35:
return success
36: else
37:
return failure
38: end if
At a candidate event ek, the Task Manager jointly reasons over the current RGB observations,
progress-estimate history, scene belief, task graph, historical evidence, and execution state:
yk = (νk, dk, ∆Bk, ∆βk, ρk)
= TVLM (x, oτk, Bk, Gk, Mk, rk, ˆsprog
k
, ek) ,
(16)
where ˆsprog
k
summarizes recent progress, completion likelihood, and their temporal trends. The
outcome label νk ∈{success, failure, uncertain} characterizes the physical effect, and
dk ∈{continue, advance, observe, replan, recover, terminate} is the execution de-
cision. ∆Bk and ∆βk update the scene belief and variable bindings, respectively, while ρk indicates
whether the unexecuted plan should be revised. The active node is marked complete and its succes-
sors are enabled only when dk = advance. The progress estimator thus provides high-frequency
execution cues, while the Task Manager determines subtask boundaries from visual outcomes and the
structured task state maintained throughout execution.
7


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
3.5
EMBODIMENT-STATE RECOVERY AND TASK TERMINATION
Physical execution deviations, perceptual uncertainty, and plan-level failures require different re-
sponses. At the beginning of each motor node, HarnessWAM records the arm joint state q0
k and
gripper state u0
k, and assigns the node an execution budget Tk. Budget exhaustion or a verified
failure emits a failure-handling event. At this event, the Task Manager reasons over the current RGB
observation, progress trajectory, scene belief, task graph, attempt history, and remaining task-level
budget encoded in rk. It may continue a slowly progressing skill, acquire additional evidence when
the outcome is ambiguous, recover from a local execution deviation, revise the unexecuted plan when
the current strategy is invalid, or terminate when no feasible continuation remains.
When dk = recover, the saved embodiment state provides a physically grounded recovery target.
Multi-step joint control drives the arm and gripper toward (q0
k, u0
k):
(qt, ut)
recover
−−−−−−−−−→
multi-step control (q0
k, u0
k).
(17)
Recovery resets only the robot embodiment, preserving the environment, scene belief, and information
acquired during prior execution. The local WAM state is then cleared. The Task Manager may retry
the active node with a revised local goal or replace the unexecuted graph suffix with an alternative
strategy, after which the resulting plan is projected back into the executable space. The outcome of
each attempt is recorded in Mk, allowing subsequent recovery decisions to depend on accumulated
evidence and prior failures rather than a fixed per-node retry count.
The harness determines task termination dynamically, allowing trajectory length to follow physical
progress. A task succeeds when every required node is complete and final visual verification confirms
the global goal. It fails when the graph terminates without satisfying the goal, the Task Manager
determines that no plan supported by the available WAM skills remains feasible, or the bounded
task-level execution and recovery budget is exhausted. A finite task graph and bounded task-level
budget guarantee eventual termination.
3.6
OVERALL INFERENCE PROCEDURE
Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete inference procedure. This procedure characterizes Harness-
WAM as an event-driven recursive state-estimation and decision system. Structured memory supplies
cross-stage state, executable-space projection constrains VLM decisions, progress estimation connects
continuous control to discrete task events, and local recovery handles physical execution deviations.
Together, these components organize finite-horizon WAM invocations into persistent, verifiable, and
recoverable embodied-agent behavior.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate whether model-external agentic orchestration improves the reliability of WAM-based
embodied task execution across memory-dependent and long-horizon compositional settings. In
addition to full-task and subtask success, controlled ablations and plan-level diagnostics isolate
how structured task state, executable-space projection, event-driven control, and failure recovery
contribute to the resulting behavior.
4.1
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Benchmarks.
We evaluate HarnessWAM on RoboMemArena (Lei et al., 2026) and RoboCerebra
Ideal (Han et al., 2026). RoboMemArena comprises 26 long-horizon manipulation tasks with an
average trajectory length of 1,076 environment steps, and 68.9% of its subtasks depend on histori-
cal information. The benchmark contains four complementary task families: multi-object transfer,
occlusion, counting, and sequential execution, with 4, 11, 7, and 4 tasks, respectively. These fam-
ilies evaluate persistent tracking of completed operations, maintenance of occluded scene state,
repeated-action counting, and cross-stage reference resolution. RoboCerebra targets long-horizon
compositional manipulation and high-level reasoning. The two benchmarks are complementary:
RoboMemArena emphasizes history-dependent decisions under partial observability, whereas Robo-
Cerebra Ideal emphasizes reliable extended-plan generation and execution.
8


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Metrics.
For RoboMemArena, we report full-task success and subtask success. Let task i contain
Ki stage-level verification predicates, where ψ(k)
i
indicates whether the goal state of subtask k is
satisfied. Full-task success is defined as
SRtask = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Ki
Y
k=1
I
h
ψ(k)
i
= 1
i
.
(18)
Subtask success is the macro-average fraction of completed subtasks:
SRsub = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
Ki
Ki
X
k=1
I
h
ψ(k)
i
= 1
i
.
(19)
The former measures end-to-end reliability, while the latter retains information about partial progress
when the full task is not completed. For RoboCerebra, we follow the official protocol and compute
SR as the mean completion rate of key object-state transitions:
SRRC = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
Ki
Ki
X
k=1
I
h
ψ(k)
i
= 1
i
,
(20)
where Ki is the number of key object-state transitions in task i. We report this metric on the
RoboCerebra Ideal subset.
Evaluation protocol.
For HarnessWAM and the same-WAM diagnostic variants, each task is
evaluated over 20 rollouts with matched initial states, random seeds, observation interfaces, and
task-level execution budgets. We report macro-averages across tasks and rollouts. Published baseline
numbers are taken from the corresponding benchmark evaluations. HarnessWAM determines subtask
transitions and episode termination dynamically from execution evidence within the task-level budget;
it does not use predetermined switching times.
Models and implementation details.
We use LingBot-VA as the underlying WAM (Li et al., 2026).
Its architecture is unchanged and is fine-tuned separately on the training data of each benchmark.
Within a benchmark, all comparisons and ablations share the same WAM checkpoint, isolating the
contribution of task-level orchestration. On RoboMemArena, the WAM receives 256 × 256 agent-
view and wrist-view RGB images together with robot state, and generates action chunks conditioned
on a local skill instruction. The Task Manager uses Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct without task-specific
fine-tuning. Its visual input consists only of multi-view RGB, without depth, segmentation labels, or
privileged simulator state.
The progress estimator takes the latest five timesteps of dual-view RGB and the active skill instruction
as input. A frozen SigLIP2-base-patch16-256 encoder extracts multi-view spatial features, followed
by a four-layer causal Transformer that models local temporal evolution. Its objective combines con-
tinuous progress regression, interval classification, pairwise ranking, endpoint anchoring, completion
prediction, and local monotonicity. We split training and validation data by episode and select the
checkpoint with the lowest validation progress error.
Baselines.
On RoboMemArena, we compare against π0.5 (Intelligence et al., 2025), HiF-VLA (Lin
et al., 2026), MemoryVLA (Shi et al., 2026), MemER (Sridhar et al., 2026), and PrediMem (Lei et al.,
2026) baselines. We additionally construct two diagnostic baselines using the same LingBot-VA
checkpoint as HarnessWAM. WAM + Whole Task conditions the WAM directly on the global
instruction, without explicit decomposition or persistent task state. WAM + Static Plan generates a
linear subtask sequence once at initialization and holds it fixed throughout execution, without memory
updates or replanning. On RoboCerebra Ideal, we compare against π0.5 (Intelligence et al., 2025),
OpenVLA (Kim et al., 2024), GPT-4o Planner + OpenVLA, and the HPE Framework (Han et al.,
2026). All HarnessWAM variants use Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct as the Task Manager.
4.2
MAIN RESULTS
RoboMemArena.
Table 1 compares full-task and subtask success across the four task families.
The published methods provide benchmark-level context, while WAM + Whole Task and WAM +
Static Plan control for the LingBot-VA checkpoint and isolate the effect of task-level orchestration.
9


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Table 1: Full-task and subtask success rates on RoboMemArena (%).
Method
Transfer
Occlusion
Counting
Sequence
Average
SRtask
SRsub
SRtask
SRsub
SRtask
SRsub
SRtask
SRsub
SRtask
SRsub
(a) Published baselines
π0.5
20.0
42.8
12.7
17.2
14.3
50.9
60.0
71.6
21.5
38.7
HiF-VLA
17.5
38.9
12.7
27.1
8.6
45.9
42.5
70.2
16.9
39.8
MemoryVLA
15.0
37.2
7.3
13.1
14.3
55.1
37.5
65.2
15.0
35.3
MemER
20.0
36.1
16.4
33.2
27.1
65.1
65.0
79.1
27.3
49.1
PrediMem
22.5
45.2
27.3
38.4
45.7
69.3
72.5
89.5
38.5
55.2
(b) WAM-based variants
WAM + Whole Task
11.3
12.5
41.3
42.8
51.4
75.8
73.8
77.1
44.4
52.3
WAM + Static Plan
15.0
16.7
38.2
49.8
67.2
90.1
73.8
91.9
47.9
62.0
HarnessWAM
21.3
31.5
55.0
63.9
73.6
88.2
86.3
93.0
59.6
69.9
Table 2: Success rate on RoboCerebra Ideal (%).
Method
Ideal SR ↑
π0.5
1.88
OpenVLA
7.84
GPT-4o Planner + OpenVLA
21.92
HPE Framework
21.10
HarnessWAM
23.70
HarnessWAM achieves the best average performance under both metrics, reaching 59.6% full-task
success and 69.9% subtask success. These results exceed PrediMem by 21.1 and 14.7 percentage
points, respectively. Within the controlled WAM comparison, introducing a static decomposition
improves WAM + Whole Task by 3.5 points in full-task success and 9.7 points in subtask success.
HarnessWAM adds a further 11.7 and 7.9 points over WAM + Static Plan, showing that initial
decomposition alone does not account for the improvement; persistent task state and closed-loop task
management remain necessary for reliable composition.
The task-family breakdown further separates local skill reliability from successful composition.
Relative to WAM + Static Plan, HarnessWAM improves full-task success by 16.8 points on occlusion
and 12.5 points on sequential execution, while its largest subtask gain is 14.8 points on transfer.
On counting, subtask success decreases by 1.9 points, yet full-task success increases by 6.4 points,
indicating that HarnessWAM more consistently composes locally completed stages into a correct
end-to-end execution.
RoboCerebra.
Table 2 reports performance on the Ideal subset. HarnessWAM achieves an SR of
23.70%, outperforming GPT-4o Planner + OpenVLA by 1.78 percentage points and the HPE Frame-
work by 2.60 points. Because RoboCerebra Ideal is static and fully observable, this improvement
shows that the benefits of HarnessWAM extend beyond explicit memory recovery: dependency-aware
planning, outcome-conditioned transitions, and failure-aware adaptation also improve the execution
of extended multi-skill plans.
4.3
ABLATION STUDIES
We perform all ablations on RoboMemArena using identical LingBot-VA weights, initial states, and
evaluation seeds. Table 3 studies five interventions. Without task state removes structured scene
facts, interaction history, and variable bindings, leaving the Task Manager with only the current image
and global instruction. Without executable projection bypasses capability, argument, precondition,
holding-state, and dependency checks on the VLM plan. Without progress events replaces progress-
conditioned event triggering with fixed-interval Task Manager invocation. Progress-only switching
allows the progress estimator to determine subtask completion without semantic outcome verification.
10


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Table 3: Ablation results on RoboMemArena (%).
Method
Transfer
Occlusion
Counting
Sequence
Average
SRtask SRsub SRtask SRsub SRtask SRsub SRtask SRsub SRtask SRsub
HarnessWAM
21.3
31.5
55.0
63.9
73.6
88.2
86.3
93.0
59.6
69.9
w/o task state
15.1
16.9
38.4
49.1
66.2
87.1
73.8
91.9
47.7
61.1
w/o executable projection
5.0
10.6
9.1
29.3
23.6
54.8
48.8
61.7
18.5
38.3
w/o progress events
13.8
17.5
37.3
43.1
41.4
70.9
60.0
69.6
38.3
50.7
progress-only switching
26.3
29.6
53.1
61.7
65.7
85.0
72.5
97.9
55.4
68.4
w/o recovery
21.2
33.5
51.3
61.2
65.7
86.9
75.0
85.8
54.2
67.7
Table 4: Effect of executable-space projection on plan quality (%).
Plan representation
Syntax ↑
Dependencies ↑
Binding ↑
Executability ↑
Raw VLM plan
60.8
58.1
21.3
13.8
+ normalization and aliasing
84.6
67.5
63.8
42.3
+ executable-space projection
95.2
92.9
88.3
72.9
Without recovery terminates after a detected failure or budget exhaustion, rather than restoring the
embodiment state and adapting the remaining plan.
Task-level effects.
Executable-space projection has the largest measured contribution: removing
it reduces average full-task success from 59.6% to 18.5% and subtask success from 69.9% to
38.3%, corresponding to drops of 41.1 and 31.6 percentage points. The degradation spans all four
task families, indicating that a semantically plausible plan is often insufficient unless its operators,
arguments, dependencies, and embodiment-state transitions conform to the WAM execution interface.
Removing progress-conditioned events produces the next largest decline, lowering the two metrics by
21.3 and 19.2 points; fixed-frequency deliberation therefore provides a poor substitute for execution-
aware event selection.
Removing structured task state yields 47.7% full-task and 61.1% subtask success, a decrease of 11.9
and 8.8 points from HarnessWAM. Its largest full-task degradation occurs on occlusion, consistent
with the need to preserve evidence after relevant scene content becomes hidden. Progress-only
switching retains a similar average subtask success (68.4% versus 69.9%) but lowers full-task success
to 55.4%. The contrast is particularly pronounced on sequential execution, where subtask success
rises to 97.9% while full-task success falls from 86.3% to 72.5%; high local completion scores
therefore do not substitute for semantic verification of task transitions. Finally, removing recovery
decreases average full-task and subtask success by 5.4 and 2.2 points, with the largest loss on
sequential execution, where an unrecovered local failure can invalidate a long remaining suffix.
Plan-level diagnosis of executable-space projection.
The large task-level degradation caused by
removing projection motivates a direct analysis of the intermediate plans. We compare the graph
generated directly by the VLM, a lexically normalized graph in which operator expressions and safe
entity aliases are mapped to the canonical WAM prompt vocabulary, and the fully projected graph
after capability, dependency, binding, and embodiment-state constraints are enforced. We measure
syntactic validity, dependency satisfaction, object-binding accuracy, and executability. Reference
decompositions are used only for this offline node- and dependency-level analysis and are never
provided to HarnessWAM during inference.
Raw VLM plans exhibit substantial discrepancies with the WAM execution interface: only 60.8%
satisfy the required syntax, and their executability is 13.8%. Lexical normalization and alias resolution
provide a strong first-stage correction, improving syntax by 23.8 points, object binding by 42.5 points,
and executability by 28.5 points. Surface canonicalization alone nevertheless leaves dependency
satisfaction at 67.5% and executability at 42.3%. Enforcing the complete executable-space projection
raises these metrics to 92.9% and 72.9%, corresponding to further gains of 25.4 and 30.6 points;
syntax and binding accuracy also increase to 95.2% and 88.3%. These results distinguish lexical
alignment from executable plan construction: canonical vocabulary reduces semantic-interface
11


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Initial State
Open top drawer
Close top drawer
Open middle drawer
Open bottom drawer
Close bottom drawer
Open top drawer
Pick cookie
Close middle drawer
Place cookie to top drawer
Figure 3: Selected keyframes from a representative HarnessWAM rollout on RoboMemArena Task 4.
The robot opens and closes all three drawers in sequence, retains the evidence identifying the non-
empty top drawer after it becomes occluded, and conditions subsequent execution on this target
binding. It then reopens the target drawer and picks and places the target object inside.
mismatch, while capability, dependency, binding, and embodiment-state constraints are required to
produce plans that can be reliably instantiated by the WAM. This plan-level effect is consistent with
the 41.1-point decrease in average full-task success when projection is removed.
4.4
QUALITATIVE RESULTS
Figure 3 presents selected keyframes from a representative rollout on RoboMemArena Task 4.
HarnessWAM sequentially opens and closes the top, middle, and bottom drawers, recording evidence
about their contents whenever each drawer becomes observable. After exploration, the current
RGB observation alone no longer reveals which drawer was non-empty. The retained task state
nevertheless binds the target to the top drawer and instantiates the remaining manipulation sequence.
HarnessWAM then reopens the top drawer, picks the target object, and places it inside. The rollout
illustrates how information-gathering actions, cross-stage evidence, delayed target binding, and local
WAM skills support coherent execution beyond the observable context of any individual skill.
5
CONCLUSION
We introduced HarnessWAM, a model-external agentic framework that bridges finite-horizon WAM
execution and the persistent deliberation required by complex embodied tasks. HarnessWAM or-
ganizes local WAM skills through an evidence-grounded scene belief and structured task graph,
constrains open-ended VLM plans through capability-conditioned executable-space projection,
and couples high-frequency progress estimation with event-triggered semantic verification and
embodiment-state recovery. On RoboMemArena, HarnessWAM achieves 59.6% full-task success and
69.9% subtask success; on RoboCerebra Ideal, it achieves an SR of 23.7%. Controlled comparisons
and ablations show that the gains cannot be explained by the underlying WAM or an initial decompo-
sition alone. Plan-level diagnostics further show that lexical normalization closes only part of the
semantic-interface gap: enforcing capability, dependency, binding, and embodiment-state constraints
raises plan executability from 42.3% to 72.9%. Together with persistent task state, execution-aware
transitions, and recovery, this constrained planning interface enables more reliable multi-stage compo-
sition. These results support a broader view of WAM-based embodied intelligence in which task-level
reliability emerges from the interaction between predictive skill execution and a structured agentic
runtime. Extending this framework to real-world manipulation, broader WAM skill repertoires, and
calibrated uncertainty-aware deliberation constitutes an important direction for future work.
REFERENCES
Christopher Agia, Rohan Sinha, Jingyun Yang, Zi-ang Cao, Rika Antonova, Marco Pavone, and Jean-
nette Bohg. Unpacking failure modes of generative policies: Runtime monitoring of consistency
and progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04640, 2024.
12


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Valts Blukis, Chris Paxton, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Yoav Artzi. A persistent spatial semantic
representation for high-level natural language instruction execution. In Conference on Robot
Learning, pp. 706–717. PMLR, 2022.
Ian M Bullock, Joshua Z Zheng, Sara De La Rosa, Charlotte Guertler, and Aaron M Dollar. Grasp
frequency and usage in daily household and machine shop tasks. IEEE transactions on haptics, 6
(3):296–308, 2013.
Qianzhong Chen, Justin Yu, Mac Schwager, Pieter Abbeel, Yide Shentu, and Philipp Wu. Sarm: Stage-
aware reward modeling for long horizon robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25358,
2025.
Zeren Chen, Zhelun Shi, Xiaoya Lu, Lehan He, Sucheng Qian, Zhenfei Yin, Wanli Ouyang, Jing
Shao, Yu Qiao, Cewu Lu, et al. Rh20t-p: A primitive-level robotic dataset towards composable
generalization agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19622, 2024.
Yinpei Dai, Hongze Fu, Jayjun Lee, Yuejiang Liu, Haoran Zhang, Jianing Yang, Chelsea Finn,
Nima Fazeli, and Joyce Chai. Robomme: Benchmarking and understanding memory for robotic
generalist policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04639, 2026.
Yilun Du, Sherry Yang, Bo Dai, Hanjun Dai, Ofir Nachum, Josh Tenenbaum, Dale Schuurmans, and
Pieter Abbeel. Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 36:9156–9172, 2023.
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Alex X Lee, and Sergey Levine. Self-supervised visual planning with
temporal skip connections. CoRL, 12(16):23, 2017.
Frederik Ebert, Sudeep Dasari, Alex X Lee, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Robustness via
retrying: Closed-loop robotic manipulation with self-supervised learning. In Conference on robot
learning, pp. 983–993. PMLR, 2018a.
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018b.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack
Kaelbling, and Tom´as Lozano-P´erez. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of
control, robotics, and autonomous systems, 4(1):265–293, 2021.
Pierre-Louis Guhur, Shizhe Chen, Ricardo Garcia Pinel, Makarand Tapaswi, Ivan Laptev, and
Cordelia Schmid. Instruction-driven history-aware policies for robotic manipulations. In Confer-
ence on Robot Learning, pp. 175–187. PMLR, 2023.
Songhao Han, Boxiang Qiu, Yue Liao, Siyuan Huang, Chen Gao, Shuicheng Yan, and Si Liu.
Robocerebra: A large-scale benchmark for long-horizon robotic manipulation evaluation. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38, 2026.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. Voxposer:
Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.05973, 2023.
Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess,
Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. π0.5: a vision-language-action
model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
13


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair,
Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source
vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
Huashuo Lei, Wenxuan Song, Huarui Zhang, Jieyuan Pei, Jiayi Chen, Haodong Yan, Han Zhao,
Pengxiang Ding, Zhipeng Zhang, Lida Huang, et al. Robomemarena: A comprehensive and
challenging robotic memory benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.10921, 2026.
Lin Li, Qihang Zhang, Yiming Luo, Shuai Yang, Ruilin Wang, Fei Han, Mingrui Yu, Zelin Gao, Nan
Xue, Xing Zhu, et al. Causal world modeling for robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21998,
2026.
Yue Liao, Pengfei Zhou, Siyuan Huang, Donglin Yang, Shengcong Chen, Yuxin Jiang, Yue Hu,
Jingbin Cai, Si Liu, Jianlan Luo, et al. Genie envisioner: A unified world foundation platform for
robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05635, 2025.
Minghui Lin, Pengxiang Ding, Shu Wang, Zifeng Zhuang, Yang Liu, Xinyang Tong, Wenxuan
Song, Shangke Lyu, Siteng Huang, and Donglin Wang. Hif-vla: Hindsight, insight and foresight
through motion representation for vision-language-action models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20732–20742, 2026.
Fiona Luo. Vision-language models for robot success detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 23750–23752, 2024.
Guilherme Maeda, Joni V¨a¨at¨ainen, and Hironori Yoshida. Visual task progress estimation with
appearance invariant embeddings for robot control and planning. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7941–7948. IEEE, 2020.
Federico L Moro, Nikos G Tsagarakis, and Darwin G Caldwell. On the kinematic motion primitives
(kmps)–theory and application. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 6:10, 2012.
J Daniel Morrow and Pradeep K Khosla. Manipulation task primitives for composing robot skills. In
Proceedings of International Conference on Robotics and Automation, volume 4, pp. 3354–3359.
IEEE, 1997.
Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf.
Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06135, 2023.
Marco Santello, Martha Flanders, and John F Soechting. Postural hand synergies for tool use. Journal
of neuroscience, 18(23):10105–10115, 1998.
Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong Liu, Tiancai Wang, Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan,
Xiangyu Zhang, and Gao Huang. Memoryvla: Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-
action models for robotic manipulation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2026, pp. 18567–18602, 2026.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
Ajay Sridhar, Jennifer Pan, Satvik Sharma, and Chelsea Finn. Scaling up memory for robotic control
via experience retrieval. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026,
pp. 97142–97166, 2026.
Xiaoquan Sun, Ruijian Zhang, Chen Cao, Yihan Sun, Jiahui Chen, Zetian Xu, Bo Chen, Haijier Chen,
Zhen Yang, Jiarun Zhu, et al. Himem-wam: Hierarchical memory-gated world action models for
robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.10363, 2026.
Youpeng Wen, Junfan Lin, Yi Zhu, Jianhua Han, Hang Xu, Shen Zhao, and Xiaodan Liang. Vid-
man: Exploiting implicit dynamics from video diffusion model for effective robot manipulation.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:41051–41075, 2024.
14


HarnessWAM: Bridging Prediction and Deliberation in World Action Models
John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik R Narasimhan,
and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Sizhe Yang, Juncheng Mu, Tianming Wei, Chenhao Lu, Xiaofan Li, Linning Xu, Zhengrong Xue,
Zhecheng Yuan, Dahua Lin, Jiangmiao Pang, et al. Memorywam: Efficient world action modeling
with persistent memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.20562, 2026.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for
Decision Making Workshop, 2022.
Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel
Indupuru, You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, et al. World action models are zero-shot
policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15922, 2026.
Chenduo Ying, Linkang Du, Yuanchao Shu, and Peng Cheng. Robofailring: Retrieval-augmented
and language grounding failure detection for vlm-enabled robotic manipulation. In Proceedings
of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 13188–13202, 2026.
Tianyuan Yuan, Zibin Dong, Yicheng Liu, and Hang Zhao. Fast-wam: Do world action models need
test-time future imagination? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16666, 2026.
Ganlong Zhao, Zijia Tang, Xingping Chen, Zhanghui Kuang, Ye Tian, and Guanbin Li. Flare:
A failure-aware framework for autonomous correction and recovery in visual-language robotic
manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 22391–22401, 2026.
15
