Title: Towards Torque-Driven Reinforcement Learning for Quadruped Locomotion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18365v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 00:05:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Towards Torque-Driven Reinforcement Learning for Quadruped Locomotion 

Jordan Dowdy 1∗

, and Jean Chagas Vaz 2

> © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. Accepted manuscript. Published in the 2026 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration (SII), pp. 1259–1264. DOI:
> https://doi.org/10.1109/SII64115.2026.11404550 .

Abstract — Reinforcement learning (RL) for legged robots is advancing locomotion, demonstrating its ability to adapt to new and challenging terrain. Traditionally, these RL locomotion frameworks are position-based, making the policy less adapt-able to terrain types and requiring state estimation techniques in the observation space, i.e., linear velocity. Moreover, these RL frameworks often use small, lightweight quadrupeds that are limited in their viability for high-complexity tasks due to hardware constraints. This work explores an RL torque control framework for heavyweight high-torque quadrupeds. The RL framework in this paper can traverse rough terrain and effectively track a desired linear velocity without requiring knowledge of the agent’s current velocity. Using Nvidia’s Isaac Sim and Isaac Lab, simulation results of the RL torque control policy are shown on the Unitree B1 quadruped, achieving speeds of 3.5 m/s and 1.5 rad/s . In addition, the quadruped can walk up and down stairs without the aid of an exteroceptive sensor. 

I. INTRODUCTION Quadrupedal locomotion is a cornerstone of robotics re-search, alongside reinforcement learning, demonstrating its capability and robustness as a method for achieving efficient, adaptable legged locomotion. Quadrupeds have a distinct advantage over typical wheeled robots, as they can traverse challenging, rough terrain. This desirable capability presents an opportunity to apply quadrupeds in fields such as search and rescue, construction, and agriculture, where advanced locomotion is a baseline requirement for working in these industries. Larger quadrupeds, such as the Unitree B series and Boston Dynamics’s Spot, show greater viability in these fields than their more agile counterparts, Unitree’s Go lineup or MIT’s mini-cheetah, as they demonstrate greater capability for traversing complex terrain while carrying payloads or equipment. These extra benefits increase the viability of these quadrupeds but introduce significant challenges, as the larger state space and highly nonlinear dynamics complicate the application of learning-based control frameworks. Currently, legged locomotion is based on hybrid model control strategies to generate gaits and adapt to various terrains, utilizing algorithms such as Zero-Moment Point (ZMP) and model-predictive control (MPC) [1], [2]. This approach uses a high-level controller to manage walking 

> 1

J. Dowdy is a PhD student with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Louisville. 

> ∗

direct all correspondence to this author 

jordan.dowdy@louisville.edu 

> 2

Dr. Jean Chagas Vaz is with the Faculty of Electrical and Com-puter Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, 40208, USA. 

jean.chagasvaz@louisville.edu 

Fig. 1. Unitree B1 walking down stairs in Isaac Sim using a torque-driven RL locomotion controller. 

gaits and maintain stability, in conjunction with a low-level actuator controller. Although effective at achieving basic locomotion, this approach often fails to handle com-plex or challenging environments due to high-dimensional, nonlinear dynamics, especially in rugged terrain. In recent years, legged locomotion has seen increased interest in RL-based locomotion controllers. Reinforcement learning and simulation tools have demonstrated their ability to produce robust, adaptable learning-based control strategies [3] that often outperform MPC for high-level tasks [4]. Recent research highlights the superiority of torque-controlled RL frameworks, which allow direct actuator interaction to model actuator dynamics during training. These RL torque control frameworks have demonstrated enhanced dynamic stability and adaptability compared to position-based counterparts for quadrupeds in adverse terrain environments. The majority of quadruped locomotion research has focused on smaller quadrupeds, such as Unitree’s GO1 and A1, which benefit from their compact size, low weight, and reduced state-space complexity, but fail to capture the challenges posed by larger quadrupeds like Unitree’s B1 or Boston Dynamics’ Spot. Larger quadrupeds face significantly increased system complexities, including higher inertia, greater contact forces, and the need to account for surface compliance, all of which increase the difficulty of both model training and policy design. This work aims to address these challenges by developing an RL-based locomotion framework tailored arXiv:2607.18365v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jul 2026 for larger quadrupeds while minimizing the complexity of the network architecture. Using torque-based control policies, we enable robust locomotion in adverse terrain environments, addressing the unique dynamics and control requirements of larger quadrupeds. 

Paper Contributions 

The locomotion controller’s primary features, along with this paper’s main contributions, are: 1) A torque-driven whole-body reinforcement learning control policy. 2) Integration of the Unitree B1 into Nvidia’s Isaac Sim. 3) A discussion on the RL policy’s architecture. 4) Preliminary policy results and experimentation in sim-ulation. A discussion on our RL policy features, advantages, disad-vantages, and implementation 

Article Structure 

This paper contains six sections: Section II reviews the lit-erature on classical locomotion in quadrupeds and learning-based locomotion. Section III details our methodology and contains RL theory, policy architecture, and reward design choices. Section IV explains the experiment design and structure, while Section V discusses the experimental results. Lastly, Section VI concludes the paper with a reflection on the work and future improvements. II. R ELATED WORK 

The following subsections present relevant work by re-searchers, focusing on quadruped locomotion using classical and reinforcement learning approaches. 

1) Classical Quadrupedal Locomotion: Legged locomo-tion continues to be widely studied and remains challenging to achieve, especially in non-ideal terrain. Most currently applied approaches employ a multi-modal or hierarchical control scheme for footstep planning, trajectory optimiza-tion, and Model Predictive Control (MPC) [5], [6]. Recent advances have shown that learning-based techniques can achieve superior stability and complete more challenging tasks [7]. These RL frameworks are trained in simulation and then transferred to the physical robot. One of the significant issues in simulated environment training is the so-called sim-to-real gap [8]. The sim-to-real gap refers to a policy being robust enough to be applied in a real-world setting where some unmolded or unknown environmental factors are present, but absent in simulation training. The sim-to-real gap is often overcome by domain randomization, noise injection, and system disturbances [9]. Simulation training offers significant benefits in terms of training time and robustness, while also alleviating the need for physical hardware. While training can be conducted in simulation, several works have demonstrated the effectiveness of real-world training for locomotion policies [10], [11]. Often, these RL policies utilize an action space consisting of joint positions [12], [13]. Recent success has been achieved using an action space of joint torques [7], leading to improved locomotion quality. 

2) Reinforcement Learning Quadrupedal Locomotion: 

Reinforcement learning in quadruped research typically uses smaller, more cost-effective quadrupeds, such as Unitree’s Go1 or AlienGo. While these small quadrupeds offer benefits due to their low barrier to entry and price tag, they are less suitable for use in challenging terrain and are less applicable to search-and-rescue or heavy payload-oriented tasks. Other quadrupeds, such as the Unitree B1 or ANYmal series, are less cost-effective. However, they accomplish tasks in these extremely adverse terrain environments by equipping them with high-torque actuators and a large frame. These quadrupeds’ increased size and weight can make learning-based locomotion more challenging, as their system dynamics are more complex than those of cost-effective quadrupeds. Work on RL policies for these larger quadrupeds typically focuses on network architecture, using more com-plex architectures or policy optimization [14]. In contrast, this work focuses on reward and observation shaping to achieve locomotion, while maintaining a familiar network architecture often seen in RL locomotion research. As most RL policies in robotics train in simulation using Isaac Gym, Isaac Lab, or Mujoco, keeping the network architecture in line with what is pre-existing in these simulators, and with what is often used in related research, allows for this policy to be easily integrated and adapted for further development and completion of complex quadrupedal tasks. III. R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING FRAMEWORK 

This section presents the methodology for training the Unitree B1 quadruped. It begins with a general outline of our simulation environment, followed by a formal problem definition. Then, details of the actions, observations, and rewards for the policy are discussed and compared with those of standard policies for smaller quadrupeds. 

A. Simulation Enviroment 

To simulate the Unitree B1 quadruped, we chose NVIDIA’s Isaac Sim for environment and physics simula-tion, which uses PhysX, while using Isaac Lab [3] for our reinforcement learning workflow. An NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU was used to run 4096 environments simultaneously for policy training. Domain randomization during training was used to ensure a robust policy that overcomes the sim-to-real gap, with foot friction, mass, initial joint positions, and initial velocities randomized by ±5 to 20% per term. Table I describes in more detail the terms and respective quantities used. Terrain difficulty gradually increased during training, accompanied by random pushing events that served as disturbances to the system. These random pushing events would occur every 10-15 seconds by setting the linear velocity to a value in the range (-0.5, 0.5) m/s . Command velocities are sampled from the ranges (-2.0, 3.0) m/s in X, 

(-1.5, 1.5) m/s in Y, and (-2.0, 2.0) rad/s for linear and Fig. 2. Reinforcement learning policy control loop after training. Current states are measured using their respective sensors: the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), joint encoders, and estimated joint torques. These states, along with the previous policy output and user commands, are combined to form a desired linear and angular body velocity and used during policy inference. The inference torques are scaled and clipped to within the actuator’s capabilities and then provided to the quadruped robot. TABLE I DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION                           

> Term Operation Range
> Foot Friction New (0 .4,1.1)
> Center of Mass Add (-0.025 ,0.025)
> Link Mass Scale (0 .8,1.3)
> Body Velocity Add (-0.25 ,0.25)
> Body Position Add (-0.5,0.5)
> Body Orientation Add (-0.02 ,0.02)
> Joint Positions Scale (-0.3,0.3)
> Joint Velocities Scale (-2.5,2.5)

angular velocities, respectively. Fig. 2 shows and represents the inference loop after training. This inference loop remains the same for both simulation and the real world after training is complete, allowing the policy to be thoroughly tested in simulation before the sim-to-real transfer. 

B. Problem Definition 

In reinforcement learning for the locomotion of aquadruped or agent, a Markov Decision Process (MDP) is used to model the robot’s interaction with its environment. MDP consists of ( S, A, P, R, γ ), where S and A are the current state and possible future state representing the agent’s state space. P is the transition probability which shows the relationship between actions At and the change in states at 

St to the next time step St+1, R is the reward function representing the reward received after taking action At

in state St, finally, γ represents the discount factor and determines the importance of future rewards. The agent’s goal is to maximize the reward given by: 

Gt =

> ∞

X

> k=0

γkR(St+k, At+k), (1) Where a policy π(A|S defines the probability of taking an action in a state. The expected return starting from a state S

under policy π is formulated as: 

Vπ = Eπ

> ∞

X

> k=0

γkR(St, At|S 0 = S), (2) Similarly, the expected return starting from a state S taking action A under policy π is formulated as: 

Qπ (S, A) = Eπ

> ∞

X

> k=0

γkR(St, At|S 0 = S, A0 = A), (3) Where the optimal policy π∗ maximizes the following value functions, 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

V π (S), (4) 

π∗ = arg max  

> π

Qπ (S, A). (5) C. Action Space 

The action space for the policy is represented by a 12 ×1vector, corresponding to the joint torque of each actuator for the Unitree B1 quadruped. With a larger action space than one made of joint positions, policy actions are multiplied by a constant scaler ( 30 .0). The purpose of this scaling is to sim-plify exploration within the quadruped’s larger action space, as B1’s actuator torque range is approximately ±140 N m ,compared to traditional position-control RL frameworks with an action space of ±3.14 rad . Given the policy’s focus on locomotion, the need for the agent to explore higher torque values is less compelling; by setting the scale factor to a lower value, the agent is guided to explore smaller, stable, and task-relevant torque values early in training. This helps ensure initial stability by guiding the policy toward stable actions, thereby enabling more efficient exploration. 

D. Observations 

The observation space for our policy builds on tradi-tional RL frameworks for torque and position control by introducing state information that is often omitted from the observation states. These added states aim to help the policy gain a deeper understanding of its system dynamics. The observation space comprises nine key terms: linear accel-eration, angular velocity, Orientation, user command, joint positions, joint velocities, previous actuator output torque, previous policy action, and feet contact. Table II gives a detailed look into these observations. Notably, linear velocity is not part of this policy’s observation space, as a goal was to capture state relationships and eliminate the need for standard state estimation algorithms. Adding linear acceleration and the previous actuator output torque as states helps capture a few desired properties of RL policies, with the intuition that actuator dynamics can be learned by the policy when combined with domain randomization, and that it can more accurately capture tipping or collision events. The agent’s orientation in the world frame is represented as a unit quaternion, replacing the projected gravity term often seen in other RL frameworks. User command represents the desired linear (X, Y) and angular (Z) velocities of the robot’s base. The joint position observation uses a relative position, where 

θi denotes the desired stance the policy should maintain during training. The previous action term, provided in its unscaled form, is used to ensure the policy learns how its actions change its subsequent states during locomotion. At this moment in time, Isaac Lab does not allow access to applied torques on the actuator from the environment, such as the ground reaction force. The feet-contact observation was added to circumvent this and returns a binary signal when the quadruped’s feet have collided. 

E. Rewards 

We design the reward functions to achieve a stable periodic gate, maintain desired command velocities, and remain alive, defined as avoiding contact with the base, hip, and thighs.                                                                                                                          

> TABLE II OBSERVATION SPACE TERMS
> Observation Term State Size Scaler Injected Noise
> Linear Acceleration abase ∈R30.7 0.02 Angular Velocity ωyaw ∈R30.7 0.01 Orientation Obase ∈R40.7 0.05 User Command u∗
> base ∈R310.0 Joint Positions || θi−θ|| ∈ R12 1.0 0.05 Joint Velocity ˙θ∈R12 10.1 Previous Applied Torque τt−1∈R12 0.5 0.05 Previous Action At−1.∈R12 1.0 0.0 Feet Contact Cf oot ∈R42.0 0.0 TABLE III REWARD AND PENALTY TERMS
> Reward Term General Expression Weight
> Alive sign (alive )0.75 Feet Air Time P4
> i=1 (tair ,i −0.3) 5.0 Linear Velocity Error exp (−(|| υdes
> x,y −υcur
> x,y || /0.25)) 7.0 Angular Velocity Error exp (−(|| ωdes z−ωcur z|| /0.25)) 5.0 Gait Q2
> i=1 ℓsync ,i ·Q4
> i=1 ℓasync ,i 10.0
> Penalty Term General Expression Weight
> Action Smoothness ||A t− A t-1|| -0.6 Air Time Variance P4,4
> i=1 ,j =1 (tair ,i −tair ,j )-1.0 Base Motion |ωx+ωy|-2.0 Base Orientation || Gx,y || -3.0 Foot Slippage || C·υfoot || -0.5 Joint Position Deviation P12
> h=1 (θi−θ)-0.7 Joint Torque || τ|| -0.0005 Joint Acceleration || ¨θ|| -0.000025 Joint Velocity || ˙θ|| -0.01 Thigh Contact Cthigh ∈R4-1.0 Calf Contact CCalf ∈R4-0.2

IV. N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE AND SIMULATION 

RESULTS 

With our torque control framework now detailed, the network architecture used to deploy this policy will be briefly summarized, and training results will be presented and discussed. 

A. Network Architecture and Training 

The reinforcement learning policy in this work is modeled using a straightforward multilayer perceptron with three layers of 512, 256, and 128 neurons, employing exponential linear units (ELUs) as activation functions. Proximal policy optimization (PPO) is used to train the policy with tuned hyperparameters, including an adaptive learning rate, an entropy coefficient of 0.0025, a target KL-Divergence at 0.01, a discount factor ( γ) and advantage estimator discount factor ( λ) of 0.99 and 0.95 , respectively, and a learning rate of 0.001. The policy training is conducted over 20,000 iterations, taking approximately 16 hours to complete. Fig. 1 shows a simulation of the trained policy in Isaac Lab using the rough terrain environment. The network architecture is intentionally kept simple in comparison to more complex actor-critic models or advanced optimization frameworks [14]. This network architecture acquires a robust locomotion policy by focusing on reward and observation shaping rather than over-complicating the network architecture. Additionally, by leveraging Isaac Lab’s out-of-the-box capabilities, we ensure the policy is modular and adaptable, allowing users to modify policy states for various quadruped locomotion tasks. This ”plug and play” workflow enables users to experiment with diverse tasks and environments without overhauling the underlying RL framework, supporting the broader goal of a generalizable solution for large quadruped locomotion. 

B. Simulation Results 

After policy training, velocity tracking performance was recorded for a single agent in Isaac Sim, with randomly sampled desired linear and angular velocities shown in Fig. 3. The red, dashed lines show the agent’s actual and desired velocities, with green indicating the error. After 30 seconds, the angular velocity command was set to 0.0 rad/s to demonstrate the policy’s performance when tracking only linear velocity. From Fig. 3 (Right), the policy closely tracks the desired angular velocity. When large jumps in desired angular velocity occur, the policy takes approximately 0.5           

> Fig. 3. Policy Velocity Tracking Performance in Isaac Sim. Linear and angular velocity commands are randomly sampled for 30 seconds; afterward, pure linear velocity tracking performance is observed. The red curve shows the measured velocity, while the dashed curve represents the desired velocity. The green shading represents the error between the desired and measured velocity for the quadruped.
> Fig. 4. Policy stability during pushing events. The base of the robot was set to a random velocity in the range ±5m/s for both xand y. The robot’s base height was used as a benchmark to determine whether it could recover after a pushing event. The dashed red line represents the robot’s height in its nominal configuration.

seconds to come within ±0.2 rad/s of the newly sampled command. The linear velocity tracking performance of the policy shown in Fig. 3 demonstrates that the model can capture state relationships to estimate its linear velocity and achieve velocities close to the desired ones. The robustness of the policy can be seen in Fig. 4, where the robot’s base is set to a random linear velocity of ±5 m/s in both the 

x and y directions. Setting the instantaneous velocity of the base can represent a push being applied to the robot. The base height was used to determine if 1) the robot fell to the ground, and 2) if the policy was able to recover afterward. From Fig. 4, the policy can both resist and recover from these pushing events effectively. Visual inspection of the policy during simulation revealed artifacts due to a long iteration time. This overfitting mani-fested as a longer swing of each leg at low angular and linear velocities, likely because the policy attempts to maximize the feet’s airtime reward while minimizing the airtime variance penalty at lower velocities. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, a reinforcement learning torque control framework was presented, aiming to improve the perfor-mance of high-inertia quadrupeds that have shown limited success in learning-based locomotion. This RL framework estimates the necessary joint torques to achieve stable loco-motion while following a desired velocity command, with preliminary simulations showing successful attainment of a stable walking gait in rough terrain. This controller was capable of capturing state relationships to determine its own linear velocity, eliminating the need for state estimation tools. For future work, we plan to integrate this policy into Unitree’s B1 to conduct real-robot experiments and further assess its capabilities and robustness in challenging terrain. REFERENCES [1] S. Xu, W. Zhang, L. Zhu, and C. P. Ho, “Distributed model predictive formation control with gait synchronization for multiple quadruped robots,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023, pp. 9995–10 002. [2] A. Aboudonia, N. Scianca, D. De Simone, L. Lanari, and G. Oriolo, “Humanoid gait generation for walk-to locomotion using single-stage mpc,” in 2017 IEEE-RAS 17th International Conference on Humanoid Robotics (Humanoids) , 2017, pp. 178–183. [3] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” 2021. [4] S. Akki and T. Chen, “Benchmarking model predictive control and reinforcement learning based control for legged robot locomotion in mujoco simulation,” 2025. [5] M. Luo, S. Li, Y. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Legged robot locomotion via hybrid zero dynamics and model predictive control,” in 2023 China Automation Congress (CAC) , 2023, pp. 3680–3684. [6] D. Kim, J. Yoo, S. Kim, and J. Back, “Optimization of locomotion planning for quadruped robot adapted with terrain,” in 2024 24th In-ternational Conference on Control, Automation and Systems (ICCAS) ,2024, pp. 1188–1189. [7] S. Chen, B. Zhang, M. W. Mueller, A. Rai, and K. Sreenath, “Learning torque control for quadrupedal locomotion,” 2022. [8] E. Salvato, G. Fenu, E. Medvet, and F. A. Pellegrino, “Crossing the reality gap: A survey on sim-to-real transferability of robot controllers in reinforcement learning,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 153 171–153 187, 2021. [9] A. Shakerimov, T. Alizadeh, and H. A. Varol, “Efficient sim-to-real transfer in reinforcement learning through domain randomization and domain adaptation,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 136 809–136 824, 2023. [10] L. Smith, J. C. Kew, X. Bin Peng, S. Ha, J. Tan, and S. Levine, “Legged robots that keep on learning: Fine-tuning locomotion policies in the real world,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2022, pp. 1593–1599. [11] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” 2021. [12] G. Bellegarda, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, and Q. Nguyen, “Robust high-speed running for quadruped robots via deep reinforcement learning,” in 

2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2022, pp. 10 364–10 370. [13] G. B. Margolis and P. Agrawal, “Walk these ways: Tuning robot control for generalization with multiplicity of behavior,” 2022. [14] S. Gangapurwala, A. Mitchell, and I. Havoutis, “Guided constrained policy optimization for dynamic quadrupedal robot locomotion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3642–3649, 2020.