Title: 2607.13560v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13560v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 00:42:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
1

Grounded world models in biological organisms and future embodied AI 

Giovanni Pezzulo 1,* , Davide Nuzzi 1, Marco D’Alessandro 1, Riccardo Proietti 1, Roberto Bottin i2,

Paul Cisek 3

1. Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Rome, Italy 

2. Center for Mind and Brain Science (CIMeC), University of Trento, Italy 

3. Department of Neuroscience, University of Montreal, Montreal, Q uebec, Canada 

* Corresponding author: giovanni.pezzulo@istc.cnr.it 

Abstract 

Recent advances in generative and embodied AI have been driven by large -scale predictive learning 

over multimodal data . However, the resulting systems remain largely based on passive training 

regimes where linguistic regularities create the scaffold onto which information from other modalities 

is attached . Conversely , neuroscience and cognitive science suggest that biological intelligence is 

organized in the opposite way , where grounded world models acquired through interaction with the 

environment provide the semantic scaffold to which language is attached . Here, we illustrate five 

examples of neural circuits supporting grounded world modelling , which underlie navigation in 

physical and conceptual spaces, affordance -based perception and interaction with objects, active 

perception and exploratory learning, allostatic control and emotion, and the distinction between self -

and world -generated outcomes . These examples highlight several features largely missing from 

current embodied AI, including the role of intrinsic dynamics as a foundation for learning, the 

centrality of action in aligning these dynamics with the external world, the prominence of auto nomous 

experience and open -ended learning over passive assimilation of externally provided data, and the 

fact that early predictive and control mechanisms scaffold higher cognitive abilities such as reasoning, 

conceptual navigation, planning, imagination , understanding others’ minds, and communication .

Finally, we discuss whether and how principles derived from biological systems may inform future 

embodied AI, including training regimes based on social interaction to construct world models that 

are not only grounded but also socially shared and aligned w ith human norms and values. 

Keywords: embodied AI; world models; grounding; predictive processing 2

Introduction 

The recent success of large language models has transformed the field of AI, demonstrating the 

remarkable effectiveness of training large -scale generative models using a predictive learning 

objective. This approach has enabled the extraction of statistical regularities from human -generated 

linguistic corpora – regularities concerning the topics humans write and communicate about, 

including subtle aspects of physical and social reality – in ways that support a wide range of 

downstream tasks, such as dialogue and reasoning. 

This success has motivated efforts to extend the generative AI paradigm to the domain of situated 

interaction with the physical and social world, commonly referred to as embodied AI . It has become 

increasingly apparent that, when moving to embodied domains, the knowledge available from 

linguistic corpora alone may be insufficient. Enabling a robot to interpret a sentence such as “pass 

me the cup, but be careful as it is fragile” and subsequently plan an appropriate course of action may 

require that AI systems possess world models that capture how physical and social reality operates, 

beyond what can be learned through language alone 1–7.

While the notion of a world model encompasses a broad range of concepts – from graphics engines 

and world simulators to planning systems – we adopt a simplified definition in which its core 

components are relevant latent states (i.e., not directly observable) of the environment and an action -

dependent transition model . World models capture action –outcome contingencies and enable 

predictions about how latent states evolve over time, both as a consequence of the agent’s actions and 

through the environment’s own dynamics. What world models add to the interpretation of a sentence 

such as “pass me the cup, but be careful as it is fragile” is knowledge about the structure and dynamics 

of the physical and social world. This includes spatial representations, such as where the cu p is located 

and whether it can be reached from the current position; object properties, including the persistence 

of objects over time and their behavior when manipulated; action plans, such as how to grasp and 

move a cup without breaking it; the communic ative intention of the person making the request; and 

the physical, social, and emotional consequences of damaging a fragile object. 

Enabling future embodied AI systems to autonomously acquire world models would not only provide 

grounding for linguistic instructions , but also unlock a novel set of capabilities beyond those currently 

available. Such systems could use world models to predict the consequences of their actions and 

support planning, for example by conditioning on a current state and a desired future state and 

inferr ing a likely sequence of actions connecting the two. They could also use world models to 

generate simulated action –observation trajectories for training controllers in simulation, support 

reasoning about the environment, a nd anticipate whether the consequences of one’s actions are 

beneficial or hinder oneself or others – and whether others will appreciate or hate what we do .

One pathway toward developing world models for embodied AI is to scale up the methodology 

underlying current generative AI systems by integrating multiple modalities within a single 

generative architecture. This is exemplified by visuo -language -action (VLA ) models, which combine 

visual, linguistic, and action -related information to support planning and goal -directed robotic 

behavior. This approach is largely based on a predominantly passive training regime, where “passive” 

refers to the fact that training d ata are externally selected and curated rather than actively gathered by 

the learning agent. This phase can be followed by a more interactive stage, in which the agent 

autonomously engages with the environment and/or with humans, typically over much shorter time 

spans than the initial pretraining phase. In most current systems, linguistic data play the dominant 

role in this training pipeline. Indeed, several VLA models are built on top of pretrained large language 

models, using their representational and generative capabilities as a foundational scaffold. This design 

choice is motivated by the fact that language models can be trained on extremely large -scale datasets 3

that are not available in other modalities, and have demonstrated strong ability to capture broad 

regularities that can subsequently support learning in additional modalities. Despite these advances, 

significant challenges remain, including continual learning, the flexible generalization of knowledge 

to novel tasks, and robust interaction with humans in real -world environments. 

Grounded world models in living organisms 

When considering biological organisms in light of current knowledge in psychology, neuroscience ,

and related fields, both similarities and differences with present -day generative AI systems become 

apparent. On the one hand, the predictive learning objective and the construction of generative models 

bear conceptual resemblance to prominent theories, particularly the framework of predictive 

processing and active inference  8–10 . In this view, perception, action, and learning can be understood 

as aspects of a unified inferential process in which biological agents continuously minimize prediction 

errors either by updating internal models to reflect the world or by interacting with the world to bring 

it toward a desirable state. 

On the other hand, several key ingredients of current generative AI training regimes differ markedly 

from the processes by which living organisms acquire grounded world models. These include the 

reliance on largely passive, externally curated learning from an initial tabula rasa state; the fact that 

autonomous action is typically not integrated into learning until later stages of training; the absence 

of truly active, continual, or intrinsically motivated learning; and the central role of linguistic data as 

a scaffold for learning across other modalities . This is exactly the reverse of the phylogenetic and 

developmental trajectory in humans, where language is grounded in – and builds upon – pre -existing 

world models acquired through interaction with the physical and social environment. 

Living organisms operate under a fundamentally different regime from current generations of 

generative AI systems. They continuously engage in purposeful action –perception loops to sustain 

their existence and satisfy their needs and goals. Moreover, their brains and bodies, shaped by long 

evolutionary processes, impose strong constraints – both enabling and limiting – on learning and 

cognitive processing. In addition, the world, or more precisely an organism’s ecological niche, is 

inherently dynamic, requiring continual adaptation to address both recurring and novel problems. 

These problems are rarely identical across instances, and the space of adaptive demands and 

opportunities continuously expands – especially in species characterized by sophisticated sociality 

and culture – requiring continual learning, flexible generalization, and robust adaptive capacity. Such 

flexibility in problem solving has been proposed as a defining feature of intelligence and can be 

observed across many biological organisms  11 .

Living organisms excel in this natural learning regime and are able to develop adaptive strategies that 

are well suited to their ecological niches. At least part of their evolutionary success can be attributed 

to the acquisition of grounded world models . We use the term “grounded” to emphasize that the 

knowledge embedded in such models is not merely a distillation of passively obtained sensory inputs 

or linguistic streams into abstract concepts. Rather, it is grounded in continuous, lived experience 

real ized through open -ended interaction with the environment, which aligns internal brain and bodily 

dynamics with external states of the world, thereby enabling effective modeling and understanding 

of that world  2,12,13 .

Crucially, embodied cognition theories emphasize that the same grounded world models that support 

situated prediction and control also provide the foundation for higher cognitive abilities such as 

problem solving, language processing, advanced mathematical reasoning, and complex social and 

cultural cognition. For example, neural circuits in the hippocampal –entorhinal system that evolved to 

support navigation in physical space may have been subsequently redeployed to support memory, 4

planning, and navigation in conceptual spaces  14,15 . Similarly, other cognitive circuits originally 

evolved for sensorimotor prediction and action control can be temporarily “detached” from the 

action –perception loop and reused offline to enable higher level cognition. For example, motor 

systems can be recruited to plan or imagine movements without executing them, or to simulate and 

infer others’ actions and intentions  12,16 –19 .

This process of abstraction reaches a pinnacle in human language and cognition. In humans , language 

emerges on top of pre -existing world models acquired through interaction with the environment. 

While humans can “think with words,” such reasoning remains grounded in world models that 

themselves ground language. It is not only the meaning conveyed by language that is grounded in 

models of how the world works, but also pragmatic and communicative capacity itself is grounded in 

models of how the social world works. L inguistic communication builds on a sensorimotor 

“interaction engine” based on selecting actions that are informative to others, including non -verbal 

communication and social -cognitive abilities such as intention recognition and turn -taking, many of 

which precede language  20 . Furthermore, human communication relies on both linguistic and 

sensorimotor channels, as subtle variations in tone or movement can express intentions, attitudes, or 

emotions – for example, conveying deference, gratitude, or disappointment through the manner in 

which we make requests or hand objects to others  21 .

In short, in humans language and communication emerge from world models – i.e. exactly the 

opposite of current embodied AI, where language -derived knowledge is often used as the scaffold for 

other forms of knowledge and reasoning. To illustrate the fundamental differences between the 

notions of world models currently used in generative and embodied AI and the grounded world 

models of living organisms, it is useful to begin with a set of concrete examples and then derive more 

general lessons .

Examples of neural circuits supporting grounded world modelling 

The brains of living organisms, from simpler to more complex species, are largely organized to 

support sensorimotor interactions – namely, identifying action possibilities and predicting, planning, 

sequencing, and controlling ethological movements. 

Not all animals are endowed with sophisticated world models that capture the full complexity of 

external environmental dynamics. Nevertheless, some form of grounded model appears to be 

fundamental across organisms. At a minimum, animals require grounded kn owledge of their internal 

milieu to regulate interoceptive variables and maintain homeostasis (see below), as well as knowledge 

of their own sensorimotor dynamics or of action -outcome contingencies . Yet, s uch models need not 

explicitly or faithfully represent the external environment. For example, in C. elegans, whose nervous 

system comprises fewer than 400 neurons, most neural variability can be explained in terms of a 

largely preconfigured system for sequencing locomotor behaviors  22  (Figure 1) . This can be regarded 

as a n implicit minimal grounded model, in which internal dynamics primarily represent the 

organism’s own locomotor repertoire rather than the richer structure of the external world  23 .5

Figure 1. Whole -brain neural dynamics and a preconfigured behavioral manifold in C. elegans. 

A. Schematic of pan -neuronal calcium imaging in a physically immobilized nematode (top), and the 

corresponding raw activity matrix (bottom) showing normalized fluorescence (ΔF/F) simultaneously 

recorded from 109 neurons across the head ganglia and anterior v entral cord over the full recording 

session (data from Kato et al.  22 ). Because the animal was restrained within a microfluidic chamber 

throughout imaging, this activity is generated spontaneously, in the absence of actual movement or 

environmental feedback. B. Three -dimensional latent manifold obtained by encoding this neural 

activity with a model trained to (i) generate latent trajectories autonomously and (ii) decode the 

concurrent behavioral state. Colors denote the seven fictive locomotor states independent ly 

annotated by Kato et al.  22  from correlations with kinematics in freely moving animals (forward, slow, 

reverse 1, reverse 2, reverse sus, dorsal turn, ventral turn); each state occupies a distinct, largely 

non -overlapping region of the manifold, typically forming closed or near -clos ed loops. That such a 

low -dimensional dynamical structure can be recovered from spontaneous activity alone, without any 

concurrent movement or sensory input, illustrates how the worm's nervous system implements a 

compact, largely preconfigured model of its own locomotor repertoire. 

In more complex animals, neural organization supports a far larger, more hierarchical, and more 

diverse repertoire of ethological behaviors, reflecting both increased bodily complexity and the 

demands of more sophisticated ecological niches. This requires more elaborate circuits for predicting, 

sequencing, valuating, and selecting among behaviors – and richer grounded world models, which 

incorporate, for example, knowledge of spatial relations, objects and affordances, as well as other 

agents and their intentions. From the perspective of predictive processing and active inference, this 

can be understood as the hierarchical refinement, over phylogenetic and developmental timescales, 

of increasingly complex generative models for perception and action, built upon more fundamental 

sensorimotor predictive and control architectures  24 . Unlike current AI systems, this predictive brain 

architecture is embedded in continuous spontaneous brain activity, which it uses for statistical 

learning and inference. Spontaneous activity – accounting for a large fraction of the brain’s energy 

consumption – is thought to encode statistical priors of the brain’s generative model of the world. It 

shapes perception (predictive coding) and action (active inference) by influencing how stimuli are 

processed and how actions are prioritized, while also supporting the offline refinement of the brain’s 

models and the progressive alignment of spontaneous dynamics with the natural statistics of the 

animal’s ecological niche, through which organisms become finely attuned to their environments  17,25 .6

Below, we briefly discuss five examples of neural circuits supporting grounded world modelling ,

which underlie navigation in physical and conceptual spaces, affordance -based perception and 

interaction with objects , active perception and exploratory learning, allostatic control and emotion, 

and distinguishing self - from world -generated stimuli . This is a simplification for illustrative 

purposes, as cognitive functions are distributed across large -scale interacting brain circuits, but it 

helps clarify the role of specific components within the broader system. 

Navigation in physical and conceptual spaces 

A foundational idea in cognitive science is that when animals navigate a maze, they do not rely solely 

on reinforced stimulus –response rules, but instead form a cognitive map – roughly corresponding to 

a world model of space – that organizes knowledge about the spatial environment and action -

dependent transitions, and supports self -localization and the mental construction of navigation plans. 

Decades of research have investigated the neural circuits supporting cognitive maps in the 

hippocampus (e.g., “place cells”) and entorhinal cortex (e.g., “grid cells”) across rodents, monkeys, 

humans, and other animals. The grid cell system provides an int ernally organized reference frame for 

navigation, autonomously initialized and continuously updated through action, for example via path 

integration during movement (Figure 2). It implements a coordinate system for spatial navigation on 

a toroidal manifold  26 , enabling a low -dimensional, structured representation of location that supports 

efficient updating of position and trajectory estimation during movement through space. It operates 

in coordination with hippocampal place cells, which putatively encode spec ific locations, jointly 

forming a cognitive map that supports spatial navigation. The head direction system is another 

intrinsic system where the organism maintains an estimate of the current head direction based upon 

the dynamical update of an internal model (typically understood as a 1D manifold or “ring attractor”) 

by acting and sub sequently updating the estimate by feedback  27 .

The integrated entorhinal –hippocampal system supports multiple aspects of navigation -related world 

modeling beyond self -localization. Spontaneous sequences of hippocampal activity that “sweep 

forward” from the animal during navigation (“forward sweeps”  28 ) and that depict non -local 

trajectories during rest (“replay”  29 ) have been associated with a range of retrospective and 

prospective functions, including episodic memory encoding and recall, planning of goal -directed 

trajectories, and consolidation of both the hippocampal cognitive map and cortical semantic memory. 

Interestingly, the integrated entorhinal –hippocampal system appears to be intrinsically organized: its 

connectivity and dynamics are largely preconfigured and then calibrated and aligned with the external 

world through action, as suggested by the fact that both grid cell activity and spontaneous 

hippocampal dynamics can precede navigational experience  17,30,31 . Together, these systems 

exemplify a mode of learning in which intrinsic neural dynamics are progressively aligned with the 

structure of the world through embodied action – a process that differs fundamentally from current 

approaches to training generative AI systems. 7

Figure 2. Spatial and conceptual navigation. A. Place -cell and grid -cell firing fields recorded while 

a rat forages in a regular enclosure. Place cells in the hippocampus typically show localized firing 

fields, whereas grid cells in the entorhinal cortex fire at multiple locations arranged in a period ic 

hexagonal lattice. (Figure adapted with permission from  32 .) B. Toroidal topology of population 

activity in grid cells. Top row: the periodic lattice of a grid cell defines a fundamental rhombus, 

whose opposite edges can be identified because they correspond to equivalent phases of the grid 

pattern. Identifying one p air of opposite edges transforms the rhombus into a cylinder; identifying 

the second pair transforms it into a torus. In this representation, the firing phase of each grid cell in 

a module corresponds to a position on the torus, and movement through physic al space corresponds 

to a trajectory that wraps around the toroidal state space (Figure adapted from  33 ). Bottom row: 

examples of grid -cell activity tuned to toroidal coordinates and reconstruction of an animal’s 

trajectory on a torus -like manifold inferred from nonlinear dimensionality reduction of population 

activity within a grid -cell module ( Figure a dapted from  26 ). C. Navigation in a non -spatial sensory 

space. Rats learn to press a lever to initiate a sound whose pitch changes over time and to release 

the lever when a target frequency is reached. Hippocampal and entorhinal neurons that show place -

like or grid -like fir ing during spatial navigation can also be preferentially activated at single or 

multiple locations along the sound -frequency axis ( Figure a dapted from  34 ). D. Navigation in an 

abstract value space. A macaque chooses between pairs of images associated with different reward 

magnitudes and reward probabilities. The task can be represented geometrically as movement 

through a two -dimensional value space, in which t rajectories can be aligned or misaligned with the 

axes of a hexagonal grid. Neural activity shows a six -fold modulation as a function of trajectory 

angle, consistent with a grid -like code ( Figure a dapted from  35 ). E. Inference in social space. Human 

participants learn associations between fictional characters and different levels of competence and 

popularity, and later use this knowledge to make social inferences. The task can be represented as 

navigation through a t wo -dimensional social space. During inference, fMRI activity in the entorhinal 

cortex shows a six -fold modulation compatible with a grid -like code ( Figure a dapted from  36 ). 

Crucially, this same system appears to provide a scaffold for navigation in more abstract spaces  37 –39 .

In rodents, hippocampal –entorhinal activity can encode positions along non -spatial, task -relevant 8

continua, such as elapsed time or sound frequency, suggesting that the circuit may implement a more 

general mechanism for organizing experience along continuous dimensions  34,40 . In non -human 

primates, grid -like geometries have been reported during the construction of abstract value spaces, 

for example when options are defined by reward magnitude and reward probability  35,41 . In humans, 

grid -like codes in the entorhinal cortex and associated navigation networks have been observed when 

participants learn and navigate conceptual spaces defined by continuous experiential dimensions, 

including visual and acoustic features  42 , odor concentration  43 , social attributes  36 , and other abstract 

task variables. These findings suggest that the entorhinal –hippocampal system may support not only 

self -localization in the external world, but also the organization of knowledge into structured state 

spaces through which agents can mo ve mentally. 

Interestingly, it has been proposed that the same action –perception loop that enables continuous map 

updating during spatial path integration may also operate during non -spatial model -based inference 

> 15

, via simulated actions, eye movements or attentional shifts through conceptual space  44 –46 . On this 

view, conceptual thought can be understood as a form of internalized navigation: a partially detached 

reuse of sensorimotor mapping mechanisms to explore, update, and act upon structured knowledge. 

More broadly, many forms of “navigation” —through physical space, conceptual space, and even 

autobiographical memories and imagined future events (prospection) —may exploit conserved neural 

mechanisms, with the hippocampal –entorhinal system playing a central organizing role. 

Affordance -based perception and interaction with objects 

In living organisms, a central function of perception is not only to construct a description of the 

external world, but to identify action possibilities – affordances – that capture the tight coupling 

between perception and action  47 . Affordances can be understood as elements of a predictive model 

of action possibilities grounded in the perception –action loop. As such, they do not model the world 

per se, but rather the currently available possibilities for interaction between the agent and the world, 

capturing how environmental structure relates to the organism’s capabilities for action. Indeed, 

affordances are inherently relational, depending both on environmental structure and on the 

organism’s bodily properties, such as size, strength, and skill. An object that is reachable, graspable, 

or climbable for one animal may be inaccessible or non -actionable for another. 

At any point in time, an animal is surrounded by many affordances – places to which one could run, 

objects one could grasp, etc. A key task of behavior is to select from among these one that, when 

exploited, will improve one’s state. This kind of “embodied” decision -making can be described as a 

competition between affordances – a continuous valuation and selection among affordances based on 

their predict ed outcomes  48,49 . This includ es both immediate rewards (grasping a fruit and bringing it 

to the mouth satisfies hunger) as well as new affordances which will be made available (moving 

toward a fruit to bring it within reach) .

At the neural level, the specification of affordances is strongly associated with the dorsal visual 

stream, long implicated in visuomotor control, while the cues used for selecting which affordances to 

exploit involve the ventral visual stream, implicated in object recognition, and frontal cortical 

regions 48  (Figure 3). This functional division of labor is found across mammals  50 –52 , and may be a 

basic distinction in all vertebrates  53 . Interestingly, recent studies suggest that in the dorsal stream 

there exist partially distinct circuits for species -typical actions (e.g. for primates : circuits for feeding, 

reaching, climbing, object manipulation, etc.)  54,55  reminiscent of the behavior -based architectures of 

autonomous robotics 56,57 .9

Figure 3: Schematic of hierarchical affordance competition in the context of visually guided 

primate behavior . Figure a dapted from  48,49,53 . Blue lines indicate spatial visual information 

specifying multiple potential actions in different frontoparietal circuits  54  dedicated to different kinds 

of actions (locomotion, reaching, grasping, etc.). Red lines indicate information used for selecting an 

action from among all of these options. In this example, the red polygon indicates that the reaching 

system has been selec tively invigorated, and that a competition between potential reaching actions 

unfolds to select one for overt execution (thick blue lines). This produces a motor command that 

results in visual feedback, as well as predicted feedback through the cerebellum, guiding the hand 

toward the target. At the same time, the hand shape is adjusted to the target object shape and the 

grasping movement selected once the target is reached. Other action possibilities may also be 

specified (e.g. locomotion in medial regions ) but not released into execution. 

Importantly, this circuit extends beyond present affordances to include future ones, enabling the 

prediction and planning of upcoming action possibilities and the selection between immediately 

available affordances and those that can be predicted to emerge later  49 . This allows sequential 

decision -making to be understood as navigation through a landscape of present and future 

affordances, including both predicted affordances and those that can be actively created through 

behavior. As an agent moves, explores, and receives feedback, its predictive estimate of available 

action possibilities becomes increasingly precise, while new affordances may emerge and others 

disappear. For example, as a lion approaches a gazelle, it may transition from non -reachable to 

reachable, while the gazelle correspondingly loses escape affordances depending on distance and 

speed. Goal -directed behavior can then be constructed on top of this affordance -based predictive 

model, by selecting actions that create or eliminate affordances. For instance, a boxer may move 10 

closer to an opponent to enable “jabbability” or a monkey may walk out on a tree branch to make a 

piece of fruit “acquirable”. 

A closely related idea is that of motor simulation : internal models primarily engaged in action control 

can be reused in offline mode – temporarily “detached” from the action –perception loop – to support 

imagination, as well as to vicariously simulate others’ actions in order to infer their goals and 

intentions  19 . This perspective highlights that predictions generated by motor control and prediction 

systems provide a foundational stepping stone for understanding of the physical and social 

environment and for what is often described as a grounded theory of other minds. Similarly , neural 

systems originally involved in sequencing sensorimotor actions, such as Broca's area, also play key 

roles in language, communication, and music, all of which share hierarchical, syntax -like structure. 

This convergence highlights the continuity between sensorimotor processing and higher cognitive 

functions, suggesting that advanced linguistic abilities may repurpose neural mechanisms originally 

evolved for action organization  58 .

Active perception, exploratory learning, and neuromodulatory control 

Living organisms acquire experience through active interaction with the environment, including the 

social environment, rather than through passive exposure to externally supplied data. The resulting 

experiences depend directly on the actions selected, as w ell as on the organism’s motivation to 

explore and learn  59 . This intrinsic drive to acquire knowledge about the world – even beyond 

immediate instrumental needs – has been described in multiple ways in AI and cognitive science, 

including curiosity, intrinsic motivation, epistemic action, uncertainty reduction, information seeking, 

and open -ended exploration. 

The regulation of this exploratory capacity relies on intrinsic systems for motivation, arousal, and 

information seeking. This can be understood as a “meta” world model , which does not describe the 

enviro nment per se but rather estimates its expected informativeness, captured by expected 

information gain as a signal of uncertainty reduction and learning progress, and that regulates 

behavior along a continuum from exploratory to exploitative as appropriate  60,61 . Maintaining an 

explicit estimate of the model's own epistemic uncertainty and knowledge gaps is also essential for 

endowing generative AI systems with the capacity to actively seek informative experiences and 

calibrate confidence in their predictions. 

Neuromodulatory systems, in particular the noradrenergic system, play a central role in this regulation 

by shaping behavioral modes associated with exploration  62 . In such states, arousal is increased, 

sensory gain is enhanced, and learning rates are elevated, collectively supporting an information -

seeking mode in which the organism actively engages with environments rich in learnable structure. 

At the other extreme lie complementary modes characterized by reduced exploratory drive, such as 

states associated with behavioral disengagement or learned helplessness, in which interaction and 

information seeking are suppressed. More broadly, these modes – or “moods” – serve as fundamental 

regulators of cognition and learning in biological organisms, dynamically balancing exploration and 

exploitation according to internal estimates of key environmental properties, such as expected 

informativeness, safety, and risk, computed by higher -order (“meta”) world models. 

Allostatic control, e motion , and the interoceptive system 

A central feature of living organisms is their autonomy: they must actively ensure their continued 

existence by regulating energy and evaluating what is beneficial or harmful for survival. To this end, 

the brains of advanced animals engage in allostatic (a nticipatory) regulation of the body's internal 

milieu, predicting future needs and preparing for changes before they occur  63 . This capability is 11 

supported by the allostatic –interoceptive neural system, which sits at the top of the brain’s functional 

hierarchy and strongly shapes cognition and affect, reflecting the tight coupling between metabolic 

regulation and cognitive processing  64,65 . In fact, interacting with the world can be seen as the 

extension of metabolic control through an animal’s environment  66 –68 , taking advantage of available 

affordances to predictively adjust one’s state in the world. 

The allostatic –interoceptive system can be understood as a form of world model in which the “world” 

corresponds to the organism’s internal milieu (as well as its external environment ). It supports 

interoceptive inference and control by estimating latent somatic and need -related states underlying 

interoceptive signals and their relation to exteroceptive states . These include deviations from 

homeostatic setpoints leading to hunger, thirst, heat, cold , fatigue, and pain , as well as more abstract 

factors such as the need for shelter, or one’s place in a social hierarchy . Importantly, these latent 

variables are not merely read out from sensory signals; they are inferred states that explain 

interoceptive inputs. In addition to inference, the system supports control of these latent somatic 

variables through a hierarchy of strategies, ranging from low -level autonomic reflexes (e.g., 

thermoregulation through sweating) to high -level goal -directed behavior (e.g., seeking shelter or 

purchasing an umbrella). In this way, i nteroceptive inference and control are tightly coupled  69 –71 .

Higher -level constructs, such as a persistent sense of self, may emerge from interoceptive world 

models that continuously infer and regulate somatic states in the service of energy balance and 

survival  72 . Affective and emotional experiences —such as joy, sadness, or hope —may correspond to 

inferred interoceptive states grounded in these internal signals, forming the basis of our valenced 

understanding of the world and shaping the emotional significance we ass ign to autobiographical 

memories and imagined future events. Many aspects of social cognition, including understanding 

others’ emotions, empathy, and emotional contagion, are likewise rooted in this system. Motivation 

may arise from tracking changes in interoceptive variables over time, while dysfunctions such as 

de pression may reflect impaired regulation of these variables, leading to increased allostatic load and 

inefficient energy management  73 –75 .

Finally, the allostatic –interoceptive system also serves as a core valuation mechanism. Beyond 

predicting how the external world evolves, organisms must evaluate whether outcomes are beneficial 

or detrimental to their internal state. This system provides i ntrinsic signals of success and failure –

good or bad – that arise from the organism’s own dynamics rather than externally imposed reward 

functions. This function of the allostatic –interoceptive system highlights that living organisms are 

intrinsically aut onomous and purposive: needs and goals are present from the outset, rather than being 

imposed later, as is typically the case in current AI systems  11 .

Self –other distinction, corollary discharge, and sensory cancellation 

Another important aspect of autonomy is identifying the consequences of one’s own actions and 

distinguishing self -generated sensory effects from the external dynamics of the environment. Many 

living organisms, including relatively simple ones, possess neur al circuits that serve this function and 

can be understood as mechanisms for establishing the boundary between “self” and “world” to 

support more efficient perception within a grounded world model  76 –78 .

The core principle is that when an action is performed, a copy of the motor command – or of its 

predicted sensory consequences , known as efference copy or corollary discharge – is sent to sensory 

systems. This signal enables the brain to attenuate or cancel predictable self -generated sensory inputs, 

thereby filtering out the consequences of its own actions and emphasizing information that is more 

likely to reflect external events .12 

Beyond shaping perception, these mechanisms may contribute to the construction of higher -order 

cognitive states such as agency, intentionality, and the sense of control, all of which require inferring 

whether a particular outcome was caused by oneself or b y external factors. Conversely, disruptions 

of these processes may contribute to disorders involving misattributions of agency, such as failing to 

recognize one's causal role in an outcome or erroneously attributing external events to oneself  79 .

Discussion 

In current embodied AI, world models have emerged as a fundamental ingredient. The dominant 

approach is to extend large language model architectures with visual, proprioceptive, and other 

sensory modalities, so that the linguistic training provide s the primary scaffold for world modeling, 

knowledge organization and reasoning. Biological systems, however, are organized in the opposite 

way , with world models emerging from sensorimotor interaction to provid e the scaffold that give s

words their meaning. Here, we highlighted several neural and computational principles underlying 

the grounded world models of living organisms, which support navigation in physical and conceptual 

spaces, affordance -based interaction with objects, exploratory learning, allostat ic regulation, and 

self –other distinction. 

Several recurrent themes emerge from these examples, including the role of intrinsic dynamics as a 

foundation for learning, the centrality of action in aligning these dynamics with the external world, 

the prominence of autonomous experience and open -ended learning over passive assimilation of 

externally provided data, and the way in which early predictive and control mechanisms scaffold 

higher cognitive abilities such as reasoning, conceptual navigation, planning, and imagination. 

Together, these examples illustrate how grounded world models emerge from embodied, 

autonomous, and continual interaction with the environment through multimodal predictive and 

control circuits spanning exteroceptive, interoceptive, and proprioceptive doma ins, and how the 

progressive reuse and elaboration of these circuits provides the foundation for higher cognition, social 

behavior, and language. Summing up, these observations portray living organisms as autonomous, 

active learners of grounded world models, with intrinsic neural dynamics providing effective 

inductive priors , and sensorimotor prediction and control circuits furnishing the foundation upon 

which advanced cognitive abilities , including language, are built. 

None of these biological insights are currently central to the development of generative or embodied 

AI, and one may reasonably ask whether they are essential or merely incidental. At present, it is 

unclear whether the predominantly passive paradigm will eventually encounter fundamental 

limitations, particularly given the rapid pace at which the field continues to develop new methods and 

architectures. It is also possible that active and passive learning approaches converge toward similar 

representations of certain domains, such as space, despite relying on very different learning processes. 

From an engineering perspective, once the fundamental principles are identified, many biological 

details may prove unnecessary. The challenge is that we do not yet know with confidence which 

aspects of biological world -model acquisition are fundamental and which are contingent products of 

evolution. For this reason, it is useful to consider the potential advantages and limitations of the 

different routes toward acquiring world models. 

A fundamental advantage of current methodologies for developing embodied AI systems and world 

models, such as visuo -language -action models, is that they are relatively well -defined from an 

engineering perspective, even if computationally expensive and data hungry . By contrast, 

neurobiology does not yet offer a sufficiently precise or complete methodological framework to 

directly constrain engineering design, although recent initiatives to map the brains of living organisms 

at scale 7 or to probe in greater detail the development of cognitive capabilities such as language  80 

may accelerate progress. Moreover, some techniques that are highly effective in modern generative 13 

AI – such as large -scale batch training, backpropagation -based optimization, and GPU -driven parallel 

computation – may not straightforwardly translate to the biological regime. 

At the same time, the biological route has the advantage that phylogenetic development, which 

grounds higher cognition in more basic embodied processes, leaves no conceptual gaps and ensures 

that meaning emerges from situated experience  2,81 . A common motivation for introducing concepts 

such as world models or spatial intelligence is the problem of grounding language in the physical 

world – for example, enabling a robot to correctly interpret instructions such as “be careful with this 

fragile cup” and translate them into actions that avoid damaging the object. In contrast, living 

organisms do not face this problem in the same way, as linguistic meaning is already grounded in 

sensorimotor experience. Concepts emerge through interaction before being labeled with words, such 

that terms like “fragile” are intrinsica lly linked to prior experience manipulating objects in the world. 

The biological route might be particularly relevant when developing embodied AI systems capable 

of engaging in rich and smooth social interaction with humans and aligning with human values and 

perspectives. This raises the question of whether such capaciti es can be added late in development or 

must instead be grounded from the outset by aligning aspects of their core architecture more closely 

with that of humans. As discussed above, in humans, the ability to represent and act on social 

motivations such as c are for others, or to reliably adhere to ethical constraints, is grounded in affective 

and interoceptive systems supporting valuation, empathy, and attachment, reflecting our intrinsically 

social nature  82 . Furthermore, the ability to engage in smooth and legible social interaction depends 

not only on fluent language but also on action mirroring circuits that align the actions and goals of 

interacting individuals  83 –85  as well as subtle forms of non -verbal communication, including 

behavioral alignment and the capacity to make oneself predictable and legible to others  21 . Endowing 

future embodied AI agents with analogous mechanisms – perhaps as constraints or inductive biases 

– may pave the way for more effective and natural interaction with humans. 

Yet another complementary aspect is the possibility of enabling autonomous learning in embodied 

AI agents within rich social interaction contexts  86 . As a highly social species, humans acquire much 

of their knowledge and many of their skills not only through individual experience  59  but also through 

interaction and joint learning. Crucially, social practices enable the construction of shared world 

models , grounded in common representations of language, physical dynamics, object persistence, and 

culturally embedded values, moral and social norms  86,87 . Even subjective experiences such as 

emotions are shaped not only by private interoceptive signals but also by social interpretation and 

sharing  82 . This raises the possibility that embodied AI systems trained within social environments –

through continuous interaction with humans and other agents – could develop more naturally aligned 

representations embedded in human world models and values, potentially enabling safer, more 

reliable communication and social competence. 

Pursuing these research directions would pose significant novel challenges to the field. Current AI 

research tends to progress fastest along directions that fit the available hardware and software stack. 

The prominence of language -centric models may partly reflect this bias, since text is discrete, 

compressed, abundant, and computationally efficient to scale, whereas emb odied sensorimotor 

experience is continuous, temporally dense, interactive, and expensive to process. Rather, t raining 

embodied AI systems under biologically inspired and socially grounded learning regimes will likely 

require substantial algorithmic advances, particularly in active learning, self -generated curricula, 

continual learning, and interactive learning. At the same time, introducing objectives and inductive 

biases that favor compact, action -relevant, grounded world models could help explore forms of 

intelligence that are currently underrepresented by the prevailing hardware lottery, moving beyond a 

concepti on of machine intelligence shaped primarily by contemporary computational constraints  88 .14 

Summing up, the biological perspective on grounded world models highlights how cognition, action, 

emotion, and social understanding emerge from predictive architectures that autonomously engage 

with the physical and social environment to pursue pressing go als. This contrasts with current 

generative and embodied AI approaches, which remain largely rooted in passive, language -centric 

training paradigms and largely lack autonomy and goals . While it remains unclear which aspects of 

biological organization are essential versus incidental for building intelligent systems, these 

considerations suggest that future progress may benefit from integrating principles of predictive 

processing, autono mous learning, and biological regulation alongside existing engineering 

approaches. 

Acknowledgements 

This research received funding from the European Research Council under the Grant Agreement No. 

820213 (ThinkAhead ), the Italian National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), M4C2, funded by 

the European Union – NextGenerationEU (Project IR0000011, CUP B51E22000150006, 

“EBRAINS -Italy”; Project PE0000013, “FAIR”; Project PE0000006, “MNESYS”), and the PRIN 

PNRR P20224FE SY. We used a Generative AI model to correct typographical errors and edit 

language for clarity. 

References 

1.  Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Gershman , S. J. Building machines that learn 

and think like people.  Behav Brain Sci  40 , e253 (2017). 

2.  Pezzulo, G., Parr, T., Cisek, P., Clark, A. & Friston, K. Generating meaning: active inference and 

the scope and limits of passive AI.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.10.002 (2023) doi:10.1016/j.tics.2023.10.002. 

3.  Taniguchi, T.  et al.  World Models and Predictive Coding for Cognitive and Developmental 

Robotics: Frontiers and Challenges.  Advanced Robotics  37 , (2023). 

4.  LeCun , Y. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence.  Open Review  62 , 1 –62 (2022). 

5.  Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J. & Lillicrap, T. Mastering diverse control tasks through world 

models.  Nature  640 , 647 –653 (2025). 

6.  Ha, D. & Schmidhuber, J. World Models.  arXiv:1803.10122 [cs, stat] 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1207631 (2018) doi:10.5281/zenodo.1207631. 

7.  Zador, A.  et al.  Catalyzing next -generation Artificial Intelligence through NeuroAI.  Nat Commun 

14 , 1597 (2023). 

8.  Parr, T., Pezzulo, G. & Friston , K. J.  Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, 

Brain, and Behavior . (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2022). 

9.  Clark, A. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. 

Behavioral and Brain Sciences  36 , 181 –204 (2013). 

10.  Hohwy, J.  The Predictive Mind . (Oxford University Press, 2013). 

11.  Pezzulo, G. & Levin, M. Bootstrapping Life -Inspired Machine Intelligence: The Biological 

Route from Chemistry to Cognition and Creativity. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.08079 (2026). 

12.  Barsalou, L. W. Grounded cognition.  Annual Review of Psychology  59 , 617 –645 (2008). 

13.  Glenberg, A. M. Embodiment as a Unifying Perspective for Psychology.  Wiley 

Interdisciplinary Reviews  1, 586 –596 (2010). 

14.  Buzsáki, G. & Moser, E. I. Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal -entorhinal 

system.  Nat Neurosci  16 , 130 –138 (2013). 

15.  Bottini, R.  et al.  Actionable cognitive maps for spatial and conceptual thinking.  PsyArXiv 

Preprints  (2026). 15 

16.  Pezzulo, G. & Castelfranchi, C. The Symbol Detachment Problem.  Cognitive Processing  8,

115 –131 (2007). 

17.  Buzsáki, G.  The Brain from inside Out . (Oxford University Press, 2019). 

18.  Llinás, R. R.  I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self . vol. 50 (MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2001). 

19.  Jeannerod, M. Neural simulation of action: A unifying mechanism for motor cognition. 

NeuroImage  14 , S103 –S109 (2001). 

20.  Levinson, S. C. On the human ‘interaction engine’. in  Roots of human sociality: Culture, 

cognition and interaction  (eds Enfield, N. J. & Levinson, S. C.) 39 –69 (Berg, Oxford, 2006). 

21.  Pezzulo, G.  et al.  The body talks: Sensorimotor communication and its brain and kinematic 

signatures.  Physics of Life Reviews  28 , 1 –21 (2019). 

22.  Kato, S.  et al.  Global brain dynamics embed the motor command sequence of Caenorhabditis 

elegans.  Cell  163 , 656 –669 (2015). 

23.  Nuzzi, D., Mattia, M. & Pezzulo, G. Generating whole -brain neural activity and behavior 

through unified latent  dynamics. 2026.06.05.730482 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.05.730482 (2026). 

24.  Pezzulo, G., Parr, T. & Friston, K. The evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding 

and active inference.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B  377 , 20200531 (2022). 

25.  Pezzulo, G., Zorzi, M. & Corbetta, M. The secret life of predictive brains: what’s spontaneous 

activity for?  Trends Cogn Sci  25 , 730 –743 (2021). 

26.  Gardner, R. J.  et al.  Toroidal topology of population activity in grid  cells.  Nature  602 , 123 –128 

(2022). 

27.  Chaudhuri, R., Gerçek, B., Pandey, B., Peyrache, A. & Fiete, I. The intrinsic attractor manifold 

and population dynamics of a canonical cognitive circuit across waking and sleep.  Nat Neurosci 

22 , 1512 –1520 (2019). 

28.  Redish, A. D. Vicarious trial and error.  Nat Rev Neurosci  17 , 147 –159 (2016). 

29.  Foster, D. J. Replay comes of age.  Annual review of neuroscience  40 , 581 –602 (2017). 

30.  Guardamagna, M.  et al.  Toroidal topology of grid -cell activity precedes spatial  navigation 

during development. 2026.03.10.710908 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.10.710908 (2026). 

31.  Dragoi, G. & Tonegawa, S. Preplay of future place cell sequences by hippocampal cellular 

assemblies.  Nature  469 , 397 –401 (2011). 

32.  Moser, M. -B., Rowland, D. C. & Moser, E. I. Place cells, grid cells, and memory.  Cold Spring 

Harb Perspect Biol  7, a021808 (2015). 

33.  Shilnikov, A. L. & Maurer, A. P. The Art of Grid Fields: Geometry of Neuronal Time.  Front. 

Neural Circuits  10 , (2016). 

34.  Aronov, D., Nevers, R. & Tank, D. W. Mapping of a non -spatial dimension by the 

hippocampal –entorhinal circuit.  Nature  543 , 719 –722 (2017). 

35.  Veselic, S.  et al.  A cognitive map for value -guided choice in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. 

Cell  188 , 3259 –3273 (2025). 

36.  Park, S. A., Miller, D. S. & Boorman, E. D. Inferences on a multidimensional social hierarchy 

use a grid -like code.  Nature neuroscience  24 , 1292 –1301 (2021). 

37.  Bellmund, J. L. S., Gärdenfors, P., Moser, E. I. & Doeller, C. F. Navigating  cognition: Spatial 

codes for human thinking.  Science  362 , eaat6766 (2018). 

38.  Behrens, T. E. J.  et al.  What Is a Cognitive Map? Organizing Knowledge for Flexible Behavior. 

Neuron  100 , 490 –509 (2018). 

39.  Bottini, R. & Doeller, C. F. Knowledge across reference frames: Cognitive maps and image 

spaces.  Trends in cognitive sciences  24 , 606 –619 (2020). 

40.  Kraus, B. J., Robinson, R. J., White, J. A., Eichenbaum, H. & Hasselmo, M. E. Hippocampal 

“time cells”: time versus path integration.  Neuron  78 , 1090 –1101 (2013). 

41.  Bongioanni, A.  et al.  Activation and disruption of a neural mechanism for novel choice in 

monkeys.  Nature  591 , 270 –274 (2021). 16 

42.  Viganò, S., Bayramova, R., Doeller, C. F. & Bottini, R. Mental search of concepts is supported 

by egocentric vector representations and restructured grid maps.  Nature Communications  14 ,

8132 (2023). 

43.  Bao, X.  et al.  Grid -like neural representations support olfactory navigation of a two -

dimensional odor space.  Neuron  102 , 1066 –1075 (2019). 

44.  Giari , G., Vignali, L., Xu, Y. & Bottini, R. MEG frequency tagging reveals a grid -like code 

during attentional movements.  Cell Reports  42 , (2023). 

45.  Eperon, A., Doeller, C. F., Theves, S. & Bottini, R. Action information is integrated into 

entorhinal representations of conceptual space and is reflected in eye movements.  Plos Biology 

24 , e3003755 (2026). 

46.  Viganò, S., Bayramova, R., Doeller, C. F. & Bottini, R. Spontaneous eye movements reflect the 

representational geometries of conceptual spaces.  Proceedings  of the National Academy of 

Sciences  121 , e2403858121 (2024). 

47.  Gibson, J. J.  The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception . (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 

Inc, Mahwah, NJ, 1979). 

48.  Cisek, P. Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition hypothesis.  Phil. 

Trans. R. Soc. B.  362 , 1585 –1599 (2007). 

49.  Pezzulo, G. & Cisek, P. Navigating the Affordance Landscape: Feedback Control as a Process 

Model of Behavior and Cognition.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.013 (2016) doi:10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.013. 

50.  Goodale, M. A. & Milner, A. D. Separate visual pathways for perception and action.  Trends in 

neurosciences  15 , 20 –25 (1992). 

51.  Wang, Q., Gao, E. & Burkhalter, A. Gateways of Ventral and Dorsal Streams in Mouse Visual 

Cortex.  J Neurosci  31 , 1905 –1918 (2011). 

52.  Finlay, B. L. & Uchiyama, R. Developmental mechanisms channeling cortical evolution. 

Trends Neurosci  38 , 69 –76 (2015). 

53.  Cisek, P. Evolution of behavioural  control from chordates to primates.  Philosophical 

Transactions of the Royal Society B  377 , 20200522 (2022). 

54.  Graziano, M. S. Ethological Action Maps: A Paradigm Shift for the Motor Cortex.  Trends in 

cognitive sciences  20 , 121 –132 (2016). 

55.  Bufacchi, R. J., Battaglia -Mayer, A., Iannetti, G. D. & Caminiti, R. Cortico -spinal modularity in 

the parieto -frontal system: A new perspective on action control.  Prog Neurobiol  231 , 102537 

(2023). 

56.  Brooks, R. A. Intelligence without representation.  Artificial  Intelligence  47 , 139 –159 (1991). 

57.  Mataric, M. J. Behaviour -based control: Examples from navigation, learning, and group 

behaviour.  Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence  9, 323 –336 (1997). 

58.  Fadiga, L., Craighero, L. & D’Ausilio, A. Broca’s area in language, action, and music.  Ann N Y 

Acad Sci  1169 , 448 –458 (2009). 

59.  Silver, D. & Sutton, R. S. Welcome to the era of experience.  Google AI  1, 11 (2025). 

60.  Proietti, R. & Pezzulo, G. An Integrative Theory of the Noradrenaline System: Meta -Control 

through Expected Information Gain.  PsyArXiv  (2025). 

61.  Yu, A. J. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty, neuromodulation, and attention.  Neuron  46 , 681 –692 

(2005). 

62.  Sara, S. J. The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition.  Nat Rev Neurosci 

10 , 211 –223 (2009). 

63.  Sterling, P. Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation.  Physiology & behavior  106 , 5 –15 

(2012). 

64.  Katsumi, Y., Theriault , J. E., Quigley, K. S. & Barrett, L. F. Allostasis as a core feature of 

hierarchical gradients in the human brain.  Network Neuroscience  6, 1010 –1031 (2022). 

65.  Barrett, L. F. & Miller, E. K. Categorization is ‘baked’into the brain.  Nature Reviews 

Neuroscience  1–22 (2026). 17 

66.  Powers, W. T.  Behavior: The Control of Perception . (Aldine, Hawthorne, NY, 1973). 

67.  Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. J.  Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of Living . (D. 

Reidel Pub., Dordrecht, Holland, 1980). 

68.  Cisek , P. Beyond the computer metaphor: Behavior as interaction.  Journal of Consciousness 

Studies  6, 125 –142 (1999). 

69.  Tschantz, A., Seth, A. K. & Buckley, C. L. Learning action -oriented models through active 

inference.  bioRxiv  764969 (2019) doi:10.1101/764969. 

70.  Seth, A. K. & Friston, K. J. Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.  Phil. Trans. 

R. Soc. B  371 , 20160007 (2016). 

71.  Barrett, L. F. & Simmons, W. K. Interoceptive predictions in the brain.  Nat Rev Neurosci  16 ,

419 –429 (2015). 

72.  Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K. & Critchley, H. D. An Interoceptive Predictive Coding Model of 

Conscious Presence.  Front Psychol  2, (2012). 

73.  Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S. & Hamilton, P. An active inference theory of allostasis and 

interoception in depression.  Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B  371 , 20160011 (2016). 

74.  Barrett, L. F. The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account of interoception 

and categorization.  Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci  12 , 1 –23 (2017). 

75.  Pezzulo, G. Why do you fear the Bogeyman? An  embodied predictive coding model of 

perceptual inference.  Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience  (2013). 

76.  Crapse, T. B. & Sommer, M. A. Corollary discharge across the animal kingdom.  Nat Rev 

Neurosci  9, 587 –600 (2008). 

77.  Brucklacher, M., Pezzulo, G., Mannella, F., Galati, G. & Pennartz, C. M. A. Learning to 

segment self -generated from externally caused optic flow through sensorimotor mismatch 

circuits.  Neural Networks  181 , 106716 (2025). 

78.  Gibson, J. J. The perception  of the visual world. (1950). 

79.  Frith, C. D., Blakemore, S. J. & Wolpert, D. M. Abnormalities in the awareness and control of 

action.  Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci  355 , 1771 –1788 (2000). 

80.  Raviv, H.  et al.  The First 1000 Days: An Agent -Based Model of Early Language Acquisition. 

2026.03.28.715023 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.28.715023 (2026). 

81.  Cisek, P. Resynthesizing behavior through phylogenetic refinement.  Attention, Perception, & 

Psychophysics  81 , 2265 –2287 (2019). 

82.  Barrett, L. F.  How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain . (Houghton Mifflin 

Harcourt, 2017). 

83.  Bonini, L. The Extended Mirror Neuron Network Anatomy, Origin, and Functions. 

Neuroscientist  1073858415626400 (2016) doi:10.1177/1073858415626400. 

84.  Rizzolatti, G. & Craighero, L. The mirror -neuron system.  Annual Review of Neuroscience  27 ,

169 –192 (2004). 

85.  Rizzolatti, G. & Sinigaglia, C. The functional role of the parieto -frontal mirror circuit: 

interpretations and misinterpretations.  Nature Reviews Neuroscience  11 , 264 –274 (2010). 

86.  Pezzulo, G., Parr, T. & Friston, K. J. Shared worlds, shared minds: Strategies to develop 

physically and socially embedded AI.  EMBO reports  1–6 (2025) doi:10.1038/s44319 -025 -

00549 -8. 

87.  Pezzulo, G.  et al.  A predictive processing framework for joint action and communication.  Phys 

Life Rev  57 , 61 –78 (2026). 

88.  Hooker, S. The Hardware Lottery. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.06489 

(2020).